Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems: A Survey and New Perspectives
NAN FU, Southeast University, Nanjing, China GUANG CHENG, Southeast University, Nanjing, China YUE TENG, Southeast University, Nanjing, China GUANGYE DAI, Southeast University, Nanjing, China SHUI YU, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia ZIHAN CHEN, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Root cause localization is the process of monitoring system behavior and analyzing fault patterns from behavioral data. It is applicable in software development, network operations, and cloud computing. However, with the advent of microservice architectures and cloud-native technologies, root cause localization becomes an arduous task. Frequent updates in systems result in large-scale data and complex dependencies. Traditional analysis methods relying on manual experience and predefined rules have limited data processing and cannot learn new fault patterns from historical knowledge. Artificial Intelligence techniques have emerged as powerful tools to leverage historical knowledge and are now widely used in root cause localization. In this article, we provide a structured overview and a qualitative analysis of root cause localization in microservice systems. To begin with, we review the literature in this area and abstract a workflow of root cause localization, including multimodal data collection, intelligent root cause analysis, and performance evaluation. In particular, we highlight the role played by Artificial Intelligence techniques. Finally, we discuss some open challenges and research directions and propose an end-to-end framework from a new perspective, providing insights for future works.
CCS Concepts: · General and reference  Surveys and overviews; · Computer systems organization  Maintainability and maintenance; · Security and privacy  Distributed systems security;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Microservice system, root cause localization, data collection, Artificial Intelligence, cloud native
ACM Reference Format: Nan Fu, Guang Cheng, Yue Teng, Guangye Dai, Shui Yu, and Zihan Chen. 2025. Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems: A Survey and New Perspectives. ACM Comput. Surv. 57, 12, Article 325 (July 2025), 37 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3736755
Authors' Contact Information: Nan Fu, Southeast University, Nanjing, China; e-mail: 230229203@seu.edu.cn; Guang Cheng (Corresponding author), Southeast University, Nanjing, China; e-mail: chengguang@seu.edu.cn; Yue Teng, Southeast University, Nanjing, China; e-mail: yteng@seu.edu.cn; Guangye Dai, Southeast University, Nanjing, China; e-mail: 230229204@ seu.edu.cn; Shui Yu, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; e-mail: Shui.Yu@uts.edu.au; Zihan Chen, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; e-mail: zhchen@njnet.edu.cn. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. © 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM 0360-0300/2025/07-ART325 https://doi.org/10.1145/3736755
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:2

N. Fu et al.

1 Introduction
With the development of microservice and cloud-native technologies, large-scale multi-service applications have become flexible to deploy, scale, and manage in clouds [141]. Therefore, many companies have started delivering their core business through cloud-based applications, such as Alibaba Cloud, Amazon, and Twitter [119]. Despite significant efforts in service maintenance [24], faults are inevitable due to the large scale of the system and complex dependencies [83]. Failure to promptly locate and recover from these faults can result in user dissatisfaction or significant financial losses [14, 68, 102]. Therefore, root cause localization is crucial for maintaining cloudbased online services [23, 30].
There are three challenges to efficiently and accurately achieving the fault root cause localization in microservice systems [138]. (1) Microservice systems are updated frequently, and the dependencies between microservices change with updates. Root cause localization is challenged to adapt to frequent updates. (2) Microservice systems contain multi-instances of services, and these services have a loosely coupled structure. Root cause localization faces challenges in constructing complex dependencies. (3) Using large-scale multi-source data imposes an unsatisfactory time and resource overhead. A microservice system can generate billions of run-time data each day, such as metrics, logs, and traces. The challenge is to effectively balance the analysis of multi-source data with accuracy and time overhead.
The existing work can be classified as direct root cause analysis [63, 86, 95, 96, 113] and indirect root cause analysis [19, 20, 44, 67, 69, 80, 85, 108] according to a root cause analysis workflow. The direct analysis typically uses Key Performance Indicator (KPI) correlation, anomaly computation, and spectral techniques. Such methods are often designed to ignore adaptability and fail to make dynamic adjustments according to the system environment. The indirect analysis, on the other hand, usually has two stages [15, 52, 67, 85]. The first stage requires a graph to represent relations between multi-services. The second stage typically uses random walk, pattern matching, and Markov analysis to infer root causes. Such methods are primarily designed for static graphs [67, 85], ignoring the dynamic changes of the system, and the localization results rely heavily on the constructed graph as a guide. Traditional analysis methods in both categories relying on manual experience and rules cannot deal with large amounts of data and complex dependencies, cannot utilize historical data, and have low adaptability to microservice systems.
To deal with these new challenges, AI techniques have been employed to preprocess data, represent graphs, and learn useful historical knowledge. AI-driven methods show excellent capabilities in dealing with a large amounts of data and encoding dependencies into uniform feature vectors for different faults. In addition, some methods use Deep Learning (DL) to transform root cause localization into a classification problem and fully use historical fault data. Moreover, they achieve fine-grained interpretation of faults by designing neural network-based interpreters. There have been fruitful studies on fault root cause localization during the past decade. This survey analyzes exciting papers published between 2013 and 2024 and finds that AI-driven methods have become more intelligent than traditional methods. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct a comprehensive survey that summarizes the recent achievements and sheds new light on future research directions to expand the perspectives of root cause localization communities.

1.1 Related Work and Contributions to the State-of-the-Art
Root cause analysis in microservice systems is essential to maintain stable delivery of business deployed in the cloud. Traditional techniques for solving this problem have been discussed in existing surveys, which differ from ours, as shown in Table 1. Compared with these existing surveys, our survey further focuses on the data collection methods in benchmark and production systems,

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:3

Table 1. Our Novel Contributions in Fault Localization in Microservice Systems and Differences from Previous Surveys

Related Works
Sole et al. [120] Soldani et al. [118] Arya et al. [7] Zhou et al. [145] Ours

Data Collection

Main Topics AI-driven Root Performance Cause Analysis Evaluation

Qualitative Comparison

Key Contributions
Surveying root-cause analysis models, inference algorithms, and these
algorithm performance and scalability. Overviewing qualitative analysis of anomaly detection and root cause analysis methods. Summarizing a first quantitative evaluation of a common dataset of application logs. Summarizing typical faults of microservice systems, the practice of debugging, and the challenges.
Summarizing the lifecycle of root cause localization, including data collection, intelligent analysis, and evaluation.

Under the category of main topics, " ", " ", and " " represent comprehensive review, partial review, and not review, respectively.

which may significantly affect root cause analysis results. Correspondingly, our survey correlates the type of fault data with the benchmark or production system. In addition, AI plays an increasingly important role in fault root cause localization. However, no survey has analyzed AI-driven methods and summarized the classification of AI's role in this field. Therefore, our survey discusses the lifecycle of intelligent root cause localization to fill the gap and provide reference value for researchers or practitioners.
Sole et al. [120] focus on root cause analysis models and existing inference algorithms, emphasizing the algorithm performance and scalability for IT systems. Their survey aims to guide the growing need for different analysis techniques to adapt performance and scalability. In addition, it provides guidance for selecting optimal root-cause analysis strategies based on the requirements of specific systems and applications. Soldani et al. [118] provide a structured overview and qualitative analysis of anomaly detection and root cause analysis techniques in microservice systems. Compared with Sole et al. [120], the survey by Soldani et al. [118] focuses more on the qualitative analysis of methods, mainly containing the types of anomalies, the classification of root-cause analysis methods, and the types of root causes.
Sole et al. [120] and Soldani et al. [118] can complement our survey. However, our survey summarizes in more detail the evaluation criteria and application for the effectiveness of root cause analysis, as well as analyzing the efficiency of existing methods. In addition, our survey qualitatively analyzes the existing methods from a new perspective, mainly containing the interpretable, adaptive, scalable, practical, and multi-source of these methods. Furthermore, based on the survey by Soldani et al. [118], our survey summarizes the localization level and granularity of existing methods. Since the above two studies surveyed by Sole et al. [120] and Soldani et al. [118] focus on methods before 2022, neither analyzes AI-driven root cause analysis methods. Besides, the two studies lack detailed descriptions of observability, data collection methods in benchmark and production systems and publicly available datasets.
Arya et al. [7] provide a first quantitative evaluation considering Granger causality-based techniques based on a benchmarking system, Train Ticket, deployed in a Kubernetes cluster and a publicly labeled log dataset. Their survey [7] compares the performance of 10 root cause analysis

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:4

N. Fu et al.

methods in terms of time consumption, precision, recall, and F1. Thus, this survey by Arya et al. [7] can complement the quantitative comparison in our survey. Compared with their survey, our survey not only focuses on publicly log datasets and one benchmarking system but also describes four benchmarking systems widely used in root cause analysis and analyzes their composition and communication patterns.
In addition, our survey also focuses on analyzing five existing public datasets. As a result, we provide more comprehensive information on the preparation work for root cause analysis. Zhou et al. [145] summarize the analysis results of typical faults present in microservice systems, current debugging practices, and challenges faced by developers based on the developed Train Ticket benchmarking system. Their survey [145] focuses more on the problems encountered in industrial debugging practices rather than comparing the differences between different root cause analysis methods. Therefore, the survey by Zhou et al. [145] has a different perspective from ours, which can serve as an essential article to guide the practice of fault analysis and debugging in microservice systems.
1.2 Survey Organization
We begin in Section 2 with key terminologies and a simple example to abstract the root cause localization workflow. Section 3 introduces observability and examines data collection methods in both open-source benchmarks and production systems, along with a summary of publicly available datasets. Sections 4 and 5 present direct and indirect analysis methods, respectively, following the framework stages and highlighting the role of AI. Based on performance evaluations and qualitative comparisons in Section 6, we outline key challenges and future directions, and propose a new end-to-end fault analysis framework in Section 7.
2 Overview of Fault Root Cause Localization
In this section, we first introduce the terminology and depict a simple example of root cause localization in an online bank. Then, we propose a general analytical model for root cause localization from a lifecycle perspective. Based on this model, we taxonomy existing papers according to the fault localization process.
2.1 Terminology
We begin by describing the key concepts and providing a glossary for additional related terms, as shown in Table 2.
-- Microservice System and Microservice. The microservice system [64] is a system that employs the microservice architecture, which breaks the system down into multiple lightweight, loosely coupled, and independent services. These services are called microservices [133]. For example, Train Ticket [39], a widely used microservice system for train ticket booking, is broken down into 41 microservices, such as order, price, and seat.
-- Cloud-native deployment environment. Microservice systems may use Kubernetes (K8s) technology for flexible deployment and communication in the cloud. The microservices of systems are divided into separate containers and are managed in a unified manner using Pods. Multiple containers communicate through virtual interfaces such as bridges and underlying network devices such as switches and routers.
-- Observable data in the Microservice System. Observable data contains monitoring metrics, log events, and trace records. The metrics are time series data [71], mainly divided into business-level and system-level metrics. Business-level metrics include interaction number, rate, and success rate. System-level metrics include CPU utilization, memory usage, and disk

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:5

Table 2. Glossary of Terms for Root Cause Localization in Microservise Systems

Terminology Container
Kubernetes
Network Device
Physical or Virtual Host Pod
Storage Service Virtual Interface

Definition A container in microservice systems is a lightweight environment to run a
single service. Kubernetes is a container orchestration technique often used to manage
microservice systems. A network device is hardware that enables communication between nodes,
and external systems. The host is a physical or virtual server running a Kubernetes node. A pod is the basic deployment unit in Kubernetes, used to manage closely
related containers in microservices systems. A Storage Service is a microservice that stores and manages data. The virtual interface is a software-implemented network interface, such as a pod network interface, virtual network device, and virtual network adapter.

Fig. 1. The process of fault root cause localization for an online bank.
water level. Logs are unstructured or semi-unstructured texts that record more detailed information about system operation, user activities, and events of hardware interactions [131]. In this survey, we refer to this data as log events. A trace is a record of the execution path of a request across multiple microservices and is used to trace the process of a request throughout the microservice system. In this survey, we refer to this data as trace records, mainly consisting of the trace ID, span, and context data. -- Fault. In a microservice system, a deviation in the service delivery process that is not expected to occur is expressed as a failure, and the cause of this failure is expressed as a fault [97]. -- Fault Root Cause Localization. In this survey, we refer to the root causes that cause a fault in microservice systems as the fault root cause. The granularity of root causes localization varies from method to method, e.g., LOUD [82] and DLA [111] achieve localization of anomalous metrics, AutoMAP [80] and PAL [96] achieve localization of anomalous microservices. Psqueeze [63] achieves localization of anomalous Pods.
2.2 Example of Root Cause Localization
Before starting the research methodology of root cause localization, we illustrate a simple example applied in an online bank to describe the process of fault root cause localization, which is shown in Figure 1. The microservice systems of the online banking platform run within the data center and rely on the synergy of components, services, and instances (e.g., virtual hosts, network devices, containers). This platform analyzes metrics to determine the fault root causes.
When a fault occurs, this online banking platform first uses modern tools like Prometheus to collect large-scale monitoring metrics (e.g., CPU utilization and the number of bytes a host receives).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:6

N. Fu et al.

Fig. 2. A general workflow of root cause localization in microservice systems.
The scope of the fault, including anomalous pods, microservices, and hosts, is determined by simple detection techniques. Then, based on the anomalous data, and system information from the Configuration Management Database (CMDB), e.g., deployment information between components, it constructs a fault propagation graph using a causal learning method, e.g., the Peter-Clark algorithm. Finally, it uses a graph inference method, e.g., the Random Walk algorithm, to score and rank the root cause possibility of each node in the graph, with the highest score being the root cause of that fault. This process reduces the fault localization time and ensures the regular operation of the online banking platform.
The banking system is a clear illustration, and similar root cause localization workflows apply to other microservice-based systems. For example, e-commerce platforms integrate tightly coupled services­such as inventory, recommendation, and payment­where upstream faults can quickly propagate. Likewise, content recommendation systems require precise dependency tracing to identify faults in model-serving or data preprocessing. In both cases, the workflow used in the banking scenario is essential for effective root cause localization. These examples show that, despite differences in system architecture and service granularity, the core stages of root cause localization are widely applicable.
2.3 A General Framework of Root Cause Localization
In this section, we summarize the general framework of root cause localization, as shown in Figure 2, which contains three components: data collection, root cause analysis, and performance evaluation.
Data collection is the first step for root cause localization in a microservice system. It is essential because data collection strategies may significantly affect the performance of root cause localization. Existing approaches use open-source tools, such as Jaeger [54], Node-exporter [105], and eBPF [35], to collect three types of observable data.
After collecting data, we classify existing methods into two categories based on the steps of root cause analysis, as shown in Figure 2. The first types accomplish localization directly based on observable data, called the direct analysis. Another method requires constructing graphs. According to relation representations of graphs, existing graphs are mainly classified into causal and topological graphs. Then, traditional methods mostly use inference algorithms such as random walk to determine root causes. Notably, AI-driven methods are gradually gaining more attention. In this survey, we define the above methods as indirect analysis, which are commonly used in existing research.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:7

Following the analysis results, the performance of root cause localization is evaluated against the expected objectives. The traditional heuristic methods are typically unsupervised and are usually measured by standard metrics, including the top-k accuracy (AC@k), average accuracy (Avg@k), top-k precision (PR@k), average precision (MAP), and RankScore. Differently, some AI-driven methods are supervised learning, typically using accuracy, recall, precision, False Positive Rate (FPR), and F1-score. To depict the tradeoffs between effectiveness and efficiency, some methods also use Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC), time and resource overload. Furthermore, it is essential to conduct qualitative comparisons of existing methods.
3 Data Collection and Analysis
Data quality directly impacts the root cause localization in microservice systems, making highquality data collection crucial. Therefore, we first introduce observability and its three pillars, along with popular data collection tools (Section 3.1). Next, we examine data collection methods in open-source benchmark systems (Section 3.2) and production systems (Section 3.3). Finally, we summarize public datasets to provide standardized references for future research (Section 3.4).
3.1 Observability in Microservice Systems
Observability is an emerging set of practices combined with tools to provide insight into the internal state of a system by analyzing its external outputs [126]. With the wide use of microservice architectures, the complexity of the invocation relationships between microservices makes it difficult to understand system state and behavior accurately. The core of the observability in microservice systems is to learn the state of infrastructure quickly and of services hosted in it, avoiding extended outages, and during an outage, quickly enable root cause localization of the problem [127].
Monitoring is the systematic process of collecting and analyzing metrics or logs. Monitoring tools such as cAdvisor [42] can help track errors, identify issues, and send alerts­however, traditional monitoring struggles to provide a fine-grained, comprehensive view of microservice systems. Observability goes beyond monitoring and helps expedite problem resolution by providing actionable insights. An observability strategy can dig deeper into the "what" of occurrences in microservice systems to reveal the "why," i.e., the root cause happening behind the scenes [116].
The primary data collected from microservice systems are metrics, traces, and logs, as shown in Figure 2. Together, they are called the three pillars of observability [81]. Logs describe usage patterns and activities in an application, server, microservice system, or another device [25]. Operators commonly use them to debug programs or monitor systems and devices. According to the content recorded in logs, logs can be categorized as application logs, system logs, and infrastructure logs [25]. In addition, the content of logs is usually stored in three ways: plaintext, structured, and binary. All three types are a combination of timestamps and context information of events. An observability solution is designed to centralize events and log data to assist with troubleshooting and root cause localization, allowing teams to gain visibility across the entire systems and applications. Metrics provide information to measure the overall behavior and health state of microservice systems. A metric is a numeric value measured over time, associated with specific attributes such as metric name, label, and timestamp [112]. Metrics, such as CPU/memory usage, request latency, and throughput, can help operators understand the state of individual microservices. However, it is not sufficient to provide a lifecycle of requests across multiple microservices.
To view the entire lifecycle of a request in microservice systems, we need another observability technique called traces. A trace can represent the end-to-end journey of a client request within a microservice system, as shown in Figure 3. It provides visibility into the request path and request structure, which helps operators measure system status and identify performance bottlenecks

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:8

N. Fu et al.

Fig. 3. Lifecycle of request traces in microservice systems.

Table 3. List of Commonly Used Observability Tools

Observable Data Metrics Traces Logs

Tools Prometheus [106], Zabbix [140], Nightingale [3]
Jaeger [54], SkyWalking [37], Zipkin [147] Fluentd [104], Loggly [117], Splunk [122]

or faults. Figure 3 shows that a trace consists of multiple executions called spans. A span is a request-response pair representing one execution of a client call [8]. For example, (R1, R7), (R2, R6), are spans. Besides, requests across microservices have a parent-child relationship. Specifically, a parent-child relationship R1  R2 indicates that to respond to a request R1, the microservice A generates a request R2 to call the microservice B.
The Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) hosts critical and open-source tools for collecting logs, metrics, and traces to achieve observability [1]. In this survey, we list the widely used tools, as shown in Table 3. In addition to the tools used to collect the three types of data, other companion tools exist. For example, Grafana [60] is widely used for data visualization. More importantly, although logs, traces, and metrics each serve their unique purpose, they all work together to help operators better understand the performance and behavior of microservice systems. Therefore, a famous observability framework, OpenTelemetry [98], is designed to create and manage three types of data.
In addition to the `three pillars of observability' of logs, metrics, and traces, one emerging observability signal shows an exciting potential: Continuous Profiling [2]. Traditional profiling is a dynamic method to analyze the complexity of programs. By profiling, operators can determine where the code spends its time and which hardware resources, primarily memory and CPU, it consumes [49]. However, calling the profiler is a "heavy" operation based on stack traces.
Google proposes a continuous profiling infrastructure for data centers and pioneers a notion of statistical profiling using time-based sampling [109]. Continuous Profiling has three main advantages: low overhead sampling, time-aggregated format, and efficient storage [49]. Operators can use this technique to understand resource usage down to the line number and augment the existing

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:9

Table 4. Description of Open-Source Benchmarking Systems for Microservices

System Name Train Ticket [39]
Sock Shop [87]
Hotel Reservation [40] Hipster-Shop [139]

Main Components Contains 41 individual microservices and 86 request types.
Contains 13 individual microservices and 10 request types, and communicates via HTTP-based REST.
Contains 15 individual microservices and communicates via HTTP-based REST.
Contains 10 individual microservices and communicates via RPC.

Application Psqueeze [63], MEPFL [146],
DejaVu [65] RCD [52], MEPFL [146], MicroRCA
[136], FRL-MFPG [22] Seer [41], [84]
MicroRank [139]

three data types. Therefore, Continuous Profiling can support three types of data gathering. There are many open-source analysis tools to collect data and evaluate application performance, such as Pyroscope [107]. It can quickly identify performance problems, propose solutions, and reduce resolution time. Continuous Profiling is gaining much attention in the observability stack.
3.2 Data Collection in Open-Source Benchmark Systems
3.2.1 Open-Source Benchmarking Environment. Benchmark systems are experimental platforms to provide a controlled environment for generating fault data and evaluating the performance of root cause localization. We first summarize the four widely used benchmark systems, as shown in Table 4.
The most widely used is a train ticket reservation system, notated as Train Ticket. It is implemented mainly using five programming languages and consists of 41 independent microservices. Next is the Sock Shop system, an e-commerce site for selling socks, which consists mainly of 13 independent microservices. It communicates with each other via HTTP-based REST. A specific microservice application includes a set of scenarios and each scenario includes multiple types of user requests [146]. For example, the Train Ticket application has a Ticket Reservation scenario that includes several user request types (i.e., trace types), such as Query Available Tickets, Confirm Ticket Selection, and Pay. MEPFL [146] proposes that the Train Ticket has 86 request types and the Sock Shop has 10 request types. The third is a hotel reservation system from the DeathStar [40] benchmark suite. The last one is a web-based e-commerce application mainly used to browse products, add them to a shopping cart, and buy them, noted as Hipster-Shop. This system contains ten microservices and communicates using Remote Procedure Call (RPC).
With the development of cloud-native technologies, the container orchestration technology, especially K8s, is widely used in the above benchmarking environment to provide scalability, flexibility, and high availability to the original loosely coupled systems. It introduces the concept of container groups, denoted as pods, to achieve flexible resource management and scheduling, stable environment isolation, and intelligent network communication and service discovery. The use of K8s in microservices systems has increased significantly since 2020.
3.2.2 Fault Simulation. In a benchmarking environment, generating fault data using fault injection techniques is an important task. First, to correlate the injection technique with the fault types and injection levels, we summarize the fault simulation methods mentioned in existing papers, as shown in Table 5.
For network faults, the Istio [53], Chaos Mesh [17], and tc [51] are mainly used. For example, Psqueeze [63] utilizes Istio [53] and Chaos Mesh [17] to delay/drop packets or HTTP requests/responses. On the other hand, DejaVu [65] uses the Chaos Mesh [17] to randomly inject faults on nodes and pods in the Train Ticket systems [39]. For resource faults, the stress-ng [26] is mainly used to simulate CPU hog, memory leak, and memory stress faults. For example, MicroRCA [136] uses the stress-ng [26] to heavily exhaust the CPU at 99% utilization on the non-compute

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:10

N. Fu et al.

Table 5. Description of Fault Sample Simulation

Methods Psqueeze [63] FRL-MFPG [22]
DejaVu [65] RCD [52] TraceRCA [64]
MicroRank [139] MicroRCA [136] MEPFL [146]

Fault Type packet and HTTP requests/responses delay/loss on pod, API, microservice
CPU hog network delay throughput surge
pod failure CPU hog on pods and nodes memory stress on pods and nodes packet delay/loss/corruption on pods
CPU hog memory leak network delay CPU exhausted application bugs (application packet corruption) network jam CPU exhaustion IO reads or writes busy
CPU hog memory leak network packet delay configuration faults multi-instance faults asynchronous interaction faults

Fault Injection
Use Istio and Chaos Mesh to inject faults.
Increase CPU utilization to 95%. Set the delay between services to 10ms-50ms.
Increase the request for concurrency.
Use Chaos Mesh to inject eight types of faults at random locations.
Use stress-ng to inject two faults in five selected microservices.
Use Istio to delay requests randomly. Use stress-ng to exhaust CPU.
Use Istio to substitute responses with wrong responses randomly.
Use Chaosblade to delay network packets. Use Chaosblade to exhaust CPU.
Use Strace to delay write or read system calls. Use stress-ng to exhaust CPU.
Use stress-ng to allocate memory continuously Use tc to delay network packets
Use JavaParser 3.8 to parse and manipulate the source code of microservices and
inject faults by modifying source codes.

Level microservice
pod, API microservice
pod, host
microservice microservice
API container
microservice
microservice
microservice

intensive microservices. In addition, on the CPU and memory-intensive microservices, it uses the stress-ng [26] to allocate 2048MB of memory continuously to simulate memory leak. Besides, the Strace [123] is usually used to simulate IO faults. For example, MicroRank [139] simulates IO read or write busy faults to delay read or write system calls for ten microservices. To minimize the impact between different fault injections, it sets the duration of each injected fault to 3 minutes and the interval between two injected faults to be greater than 6 minutes.
Unlike the above methods, MEPFL [146] focuses on application faults and implements fault injection by modifying the application code. It mainly categorizes faults into configuration, multiinstance, and asynchronous interaction faults. The configuration faults are correlated with resource faults and unrelated to microservices' business logic. Therefore, MEPFL [146] injects this fault into any code randomly. The multi-instance faults are targeted at third-party cached databases. MEPFL [146] simulates faults by injecting failure responses, incorrect outputs, and variable assertion failures or exceptions. Besides, the asynchronous interaction faults are primarily targeted at microservices that are invoked sequentially. MEPFL [146] converts sequential calls to asynchronous calls to change the dependencies between microservices. Therefore, it simulates invocation faults by injecting failure responses or variable assertion exceptions.
There are differences in the level of fault data generated by different fault injection methods. As shown in Table 5, most papers inject faults into microservices, resulting in the level of generated fault data being restricted to independent microservices, e.g., FRL-MFPG [22], RCD [52], and MicroRank [139]. Differently, some existing papers that have used K8s have refined the level of fault data from the microservice level to the pod, API, and container levels. Examples include Psqueeze [63], DejaVu [65], and TraceRCA [64]. It is not enough to limit the level of fault data to microservices. When a method determines the root cause of a specific microservice, the microservice may be partitioned into multiple pods deployed in multiple nodes, and each pod still contains multiple independently running containers. Therefore, future methods are supposed to provide further information to improve the efficiency of fault localization.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:11

Table 6. Description of Data Collection Technique in a Microservice System

Collection Technique Data Type

Data Level

Data Collection Technique Attribute Intrusiveness1 Complexity2 Generality3 Versatility4

Istio [53]

communication data microservice medium

high

high

high

cAdvisor [42]

performance data

container low

low

high

low

Jaeger [54]

trace record

microservice high

high

high

high

Node-exporter [105] performance data

host

low

low

high

low

Prometheus [106] time series data

host container low microservice

low

high

high

eBPF [35]

communication data host

performance data

system

system calls kernel events

component microservice

low

process behavior

container

network configuration process

high

high

high

1Intrusiveness: The data collection technique modifies the application code or changes the network configuration or

state. 2Complexity: The complexity of deployment and configuration of data collection technique, including cluster

deployment, network and system configuration, dependencies, and integration. 3Generality: The scope and breadth of the data collection technique. 4Versatility: The customizability and adaptability of the data collection technology, including configurability,

scalability, and support for multiple platforms.

3.2.3 Data Collection. We summarize the common data collection tools including Istio [53], cAdvisor [42], Jaeger [54], Node-exporter [105], Prometheus [106], and eBPF [35] in benchmark systems, as shown in Table 6. The performance of different collection tools varies. Therefore, we correlates the data types, data levels and tools, and evaluate these tools in terms of intrusiveness, complexity, generality, and versatility.
The intrusiveness of tools means that these tools may modify application codes or change network configurations or states. When Istio [53] is deployed in a K8s cluster, it provides management functions by injecting sidecar agents in each container. However, injection of the sidecar agent requires changes to the Pod Spec file and redirection of application traffic. Therefore, Istio [53] is intrusive. On the other hand, Jaeger [54], a distributed tracing tool, requires modifications to the application code to obtain request tracings. In addition, connecting to an application or a service agent requires changes to the application configuration. Therefore, most distributed tracing tools are highly intrusive.
The complexity of the tools means that these tools have a high level of difficulty, mainly in terms of K8s cluster deployment, configuration, dependencies, and integration. Istio [53] has a high level of complexity. It requires configuration of sidecar agents in the application, the control plane, and additional infrastructure to support functions of the service grid. In addition, Jaeger [54] requires additional configuration to achieve integration with the application. eBPF [35], a packet processing technology that executes in the kernel, also has a high level of complexity. It requires the writing of personalized eBPF programs to configure the system kernel.
The generality of tools means that the scope and breadth of these tools are not limited. Table 6 shows the generality of all six tools is high. The versatility of tools means the customizability and adaptability, including configurability, scalability, and support for multiple platforms. The Node-exporter [105] is less customizable because it is mainly configured and customized through Prometheus [106]. cAdvisor [42] is less customizable because it is mainly used for advanced customization through integration with other monitoring systems. Furthermore, the data types and levels show that the data types by the eBPF [35] are comprehensive, and the data levels are

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:12

N. Fu et al.

more granular than the data by the other five tools. Therefore, eBPF [35] has been widely used in recent years [114].
In summary, from a technological perspective, the collected data­including metrics, traces, and logs­serves as the core input for downstream root cause analysis methods, determining the performance and granularity of fault localization. These methods critically depend on the completeness, accuracy, granularity, and temporal alignment of data collected under fault conditions. Low-quality data can significantly degrade the effectiveness of root cause localization. From an organizational perspective, data collection represents the foundational stage in the root cause localization workflow, enabling subsequent root cause analysis and evaluation. By systematically capturing faultrelated system behaviors, the data collection process provides the empirical basis for developing and validating root cause localization methods. In this context, root cause localization serves as both the primary motivation and the downstream consumer of data collection, influencing the design of failure scenarios and the selection of observable data.
3.3 Data Collection in Production Systems
After evaluating root cause localization performance with data from controlled benchmark systems, some studies apply these methods to production systems. For instance, Groot [128] analyzes real data from eBay's e-commerce system over 15 months, while Grace [110] uses a dataset from the Hipstershop Microservice System at the China Construction Bank. Unlike open-source benchmark systems, production systems have a complex microservice architecture with layered and multidimensional dependencies between services. Real-world environments that closely interact with users place greater demands on data collection and analysis than controlled environments. Therefore, there are three additional challenges to address when implementing data collection and analysis in production systems.
First, production systems require real-time observation and analysis, but data collection and processing cannot significantly affect system performance and user experience [28]. Therefore, collecting data from production systems should balance data comprehensiveness with overhead. Second, production systems generate large and diverse data. A single production system can produce billions of run-time records each day [76]. This massive amount of multimodal data includes logs, metrics, and traces with varied formats. Therefore, it is a significant challenge to collect valuable information from massive amounts of data that may have noise and achieve efficient storage and analysis. Third, production systems involve real user data. When collecting data in production systems, it is essential to protect sensitive information through anonymization and access controls to comply with data privacy and security regulations [28].
In real production systems, many companies achieve high data collection and analysis standards by using the observability tools introduced in Section 3.1. For example, Google uses a production tracing tool, Dapper [115], to collect trace data for distributed systems. Ever since, many other industrial companies (e.g., eBay, AWS, and Netflix) have developed their methods for collecting multimodal data from production systems [61]. In this survey, we use Netflix, one of the most sophisticated streaming platforms in the world, to illustrate the practices for collecting and analyzing metrics, logs, and trace data from production systems.
Netflix combines Spectator [90] and Atlas [89] to provide a near real-time operational platform [91]. Spectator [90] is Netflix's library for collecting metrics, enabling the collection of various application metrics, such as request counts, response times, and resource utilization. Atlas [89] is the backend that manages dimensional time-series data for Netflix metrics. As described in Section 3.1, metrics are structured data. In Spectator parlance, a meter is a named, typed, and tagged configuration, while a metric represents the value of a given meter at a specific point in time. Spectator meters are created and controlled by a registry with four implementations: counter, timer, gauge,

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:13

and distribution summary [91]. By defining and using different meters, operators can collect various performance and behavior data of microservices in real-time. In addition, Spectator considers performance in high-concurrency environments to ensure that collecting metrics does not significantly impact application performance. Then, the data collected by Spectator is aggregated and stored using Atlas. It provides an efficient query syntax that supports returning results in chart, JSON, and image formats. Besides, Netflix uses Logstash [36] to dynamically ingest, transform, and ship logs, regardless of format or complexity. It can extract structure from unstructured data and anonymize or exclude sensitive fields.
Without trace data, Netflix engineers need to sift through a mountain of metrics and logs from various microservices to understand specific streaming failures. However, reconstructing a streaming session is a complex and time-consuming process that involves tracing all interactions between Netflix's applications, its Content Delivery Network, and backend microservices [13]. Therefore, engineers need practical observability tools to collect distributed request tracing in production systems to improve productivity. Netflix's distributed tracing infrastructure has three components: trace collection, stream processing, and storage. It uses the open-source tracing tool Zipkin [147] to collect trace data, Mantis [4] to process the stream of collected traces, and Cassandra [124] to store the traces. This structure enables the collection, in-time processing, and storage of traces from various microservices.
In summary, collecting data in production systems needs to meet the high concurrency and low latency to ensure a satisfactory user experience. Systems should improve existing tools and adopt efficient data collection and processing mechanisms, optimizing resource usage and avoiding performance bottlenecks due to data operations. In addition, the data collection process needs to ensure the security and reliability of user data. By implementing these measures, production systems may achieve real-time data collection and analysis while maintaining high-quality service for users.
3.4 Publicly Available Datasets
To provide evaluation criteria for root cause localization, we analyze the datasets available in existing papers and compare these datasets from three perspectives: data attributes, composition, and level, as shown in Table 7.
Table 7 shows that existing studies are mainly based on open-source benchmarking and production systems. The benchmarking systems mainly contain the Train Ticket [39], the Sock Shop [87], and the Hotel Reservation systems [40]. In contrast, some studies have used actual data from production systems to evaluate their methods. These actual data is obtained from large-scale application systems in continuous operation. Examples with actual data include Psqueeze [63], DejaVu [65], and TraceRCA [64]. The collection strategies of actual data require collaboration with large service providers to adapt the complex dependencies. In the five datasets, only the RCD [52] does not use the K8s technique, while the other four use the K8s technique in open-source benchmarking systems, which may result in differences in data compositions and data levels. Due to the intelligent technology, the fault types are more diverse than traditional microservice systems. For example, Psqueeze [63] adds fault types on pods, APIs, and microservices, i.e., packet and HTTP requests or responses delay and loss. DejaVu [65] also adds packet delay, loss, and corruption on pods. Correspondingly, the locations and levels of faults become more complex.
The experimental data mainly contains CPU and memory exhaustion, packet loss/corruption/ delay, and configuration faults, while the actual data from a production system still contains database faults, disk faults, and service faults. Compared with the actual data, the experimental data has simpler fault types and cannot solve many faults in the production environment. In addition, the fault types are typically fixed, and the existing method needs to define the possible fault types.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:14

N. Fu et al.

Table 7. Description of Publicly Available Datasets for Fault Root Cause Localization of Microservice

Datasets

Data Source

Data Composition

Fault Level Ref

Dataset of Psqueeze from production systems [63] from Train Ticket system

Includes six simulated fault datasets with different parameters, and each dataset has 100 faults.
Contains 73 faults, including packet delay and loss on specific pods, API, and microservice.

pod API

[93]

microservice

Data A: Contains CPU exhaustion on containers,

server

packet loss/delay on physical servers,

container

Dataset of DejaVu [65]

from production systems

database session limit or halt. Data B: Contains CPU exhaustion on containers, physical servers, and middlewares;

microservice server

[92]

packet loss/delay on physical servers;

container

low free memory for JVM/Tomcat; disk I/O exhaustion.

component

Data C: Contains 2594 metrics, 41 failure classes, and 99 faults on sysC, which has only one component

component

from Train Ticket system

Contains 8 fault injections, including CPU/memory stress on pods and nodes, pod failure, and packet delay/loss/corruption on pods.

pod host

Dataset of RCD [52]

from Sock Shop system

Contains 2 fault types, and 38 metrics saved in a CSV file, including CPU/memory utilization, the number of errors, and latency.

microservice [10]

Data from a real microservice system with over 50 million users,

Dataset of TraceRCA from production systems [64]

which contains 5 fault types: CPU/memory exhaustion, host network error, container network error, and database failures. It has a total of 22 faults and 17,041 items.

microservice [94]

from Train Ticket system

Contains single-root-cause faults and multi-root-cause faults. Single-root-cause faults include 3 fault types, which are
application bugs, CPU exhaustion, and network jam, and have 22675 fault items. Multi-root-cause faults have 11 faults among the 200 faults.

API container microservice

Dataset of MEPFL [146]

from Train Ticket and Sock Shop systems

Contains 3 fault types, including multi-instance faults, configuration faults, and asynchronous interaction faults.

microservice [38]

For example, MEPFL [146] classifies faults as multi-instance, configuration, and asynchronous interaction faults. However, different types and levels of components may have different faults. For example, containers are prone to CPU and memory exhaustion faults, microservices are prone to network communication faults, and container virtual interfaces are prone to network configuration faults. In root cause localization, no research categorizes the high probability and repetitive fault types that occur for different levels of components in microservice systems.
4 Direct Analysis for Root Cause Localization
Several studies achieve direct root cause localization with a single type of data [63, 96]. However, they cannot comprehensively characterize a system's state and complex dependencies. Therefore, some studies combine different data types[131, 143]. In this section, we introduce direct localization methods based on metrics, traces, and multi-source data, respectively. Specifically, we highlight the AI-driven methods in this area.
4.1 Direct Root Causes Localization Based on Single Type of Data
4.1.1 Methods Based on Monitoring Metrics. Metrics may improve system performance and mainly contain business and system-type metrics. -diagnosis [113], PAL [96], and Fchain [95] analyze the performance anomalies. -diagnosis [113] eventually locates the anomalous metrics, while PAL [96] and Fchain [95] locate faulty microservices based on the sequential characteristics of the anomalies' start time. None of the three methods can provide interpretable information about fault root causes and only provide abnormal metrics or microservices. Moreover, these methods are limited to dealing with learned anomalies or fault characteristics, which results in the inability to analyze unseen faults.
To address the above problem, Psqueeze [63] is the first method dedicated to external root causes, which contain unrecorded or unused attributes. PSqueeze takes multi-dimensional metrics and their time series as input. A bottom-up and top-down search strategy is proposed based on a more generic property of the data, i.e., the Generalized Ripple Effect (GRE), which is different from the work of Lin et al. [66], Gu et al. [43], and Ahmed et al. [6]. First, in the bottom-up stage, Psqueeze uses a robust probabilistic clustering method based on the GRE to

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:15

Fig. 4. An instance of direct root causes localization using traces.
classify attribute combinations into different clusters. Then, in the top-down stage, Psqueeze evaluates the probability that each set of attribute combinations is a root cause based on a scoring function, i.e., generalized potential score.
4.1.2 Methods Based on Trace Records. Most existing studies use trace data, which characterize the interactions between microservices, for fault root cause localization in microservice systems. Notably, there exist some studies [146] that transform the unsupervised root cause inference model into a classification model by extracting trace-level and microservice-level feature sequences. It is an AI-driven deep neural network that fully utilizes historical knowledge.
TraceAnomaly [73] achieves the localization goal by analyzing the service call paths and response time characteristics from trace data, as shown in Figure 4. Based on traces, it proposes a novel feature characterization method called the service trace vector. This vector characterizes a trace's response time and service call path information. Using the service trace vector as input, TraceAnomaly [73] designs an unsupervised DL-based Bayesian Network to achieve root cause localization for functional anomalies and performance anomalies of microservices [118].
Both TraceAnomaly [73] and CloudDiag [86] consider the response time of microservice interactions involved in a trace to be crucial for fault root cause localization. In addition, both methods utilize the response time features while entirely using the service call information, e.g., TraceAnomaly utilizes the service call paths to encode the trace vector, and CloudDiag groups the same requests based on the call tree structure of the microservice requests. Besides, TraceAnomaly [73], CloudDiag [86], and T-Rank [138] all need to be compared with a given threshold when assessing the probability of the fault root causes. The magnitude of the given thresholds significantly impacts the root cause results. When the threshold in a method is set to be static or cannot adaptively and dynamically adjust according to the systems, it may lead to false positives or negatives. In addition, pre-given thresholds require introducing an expert's empirical setting, which is subjectively biased in different environments or teams. Therefore, dynamic and adaptive algorithms need to be introduced to overcome the above limitations [32, 100, 130].
In addition, GMTA [46] and Zhou et al. [145] consider that the fault root cause belongs to a part of trace records and agree that this part differs from what is contained in the average trace records for the same task. Therefore, both methods determine the fault root cause by comparing the microservice relations corresponding to the average trace with those corresponding to the trace tested. These methods are called the visual trace comparison in this survey [118]. Specifically, the core idea of TraceRCA [64] is that microservices with more anomaly traces and fewer standard traces have a higher probability of being the fault root cause. As a result, TraceRCA focuses on
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:16

N. Fu et al.

Fig. 5. An instance of direct root causes localization using multi-source data.
latency and HTTP status metrics for each microservice call, CPU and memory usage for each microservice, network packet received and sent throughput, and disk read and write throughput.
To utilize historical data more intelligently, the AI-driven method, MEPFL [146], achieves fault localization by training a supervised classification model. MEPFL first designs a fault injection strategy to get labeled faulty data by fault simulation. Subsequently, oriented to the collected traces, MEPFL [146] extracts microservice-level and trace-level features from four aspects: configuration, resource, instance, and interaction. Finally, MEPFL [146] trains four models to determine the faulty microservice and type based on the extracted features.
4.2 Direct Root Causes Localization Based on Multi-Source Heterogeneous Data
In order to utilize multi-source data comprehensively, some studies combine different types of data for analysis.
CloudRCA [143] proposes a fault localization method based on a hierarchical Bayesian network model using three types of data, as shown in Figure 5. These data contain monitoring metrics, log events, and underlying dependency topology graphs from the CMDB. It decomposes the monitoring metrics and uses anomaly detection to obtain anomaly metric sequences. Subsequently, this method improves the log clustering performance through Natural Language Processing (NLP) to get log pattern sequences. For the extracted sequences from logs and metrics, it jointly characterizes them as a feature matrix. In order to infer the root cause of a fault, CloudRCA [143] designs a hierarchical Bayesian network and uses the Peter-Clark algorithm (PC) to learn dependencies from metrics. It is proven more accurate than existing methods and capable of dealing with entirely new types of root causes never seen before.
Wang et al. [131] use logs and metrics data to locate anomalous metrics based on log anomaly detection. This method argues that if the value of a metric has a strong correlation with the anomaly score obtained from log anomaly detection, it is more likely that the metric is the root cause. First, Wang et al. [131] utilize DeepLog [34], for log anomaly detection based on the LSTM model to obtain a score that characterizes the anomaly state of the system. In addition, considering the data imbalance problem, Wang et al. [131] use data augmentation techniques based on the obtained monitoring metrics and anomaly scores, which have been aligned before this process. Subsequently, it uses the Mutual Information (MI) [101] technique to determine the anomaly degree of microservices and the correlation of monitoring metrics over the same period. Wang et al. [131] rank the calculated correlation values, and the sorting result shows the probability that a metric causing the anomaly is determined to be the root cause.
4.3 AI-Driven Direct Analysis Methods
In the direct root cause analysis, we classify AI-driven approaches into three categories based on the role AI plays in the workflow: the optimization of data processing, optimization of Bayesian models, and modeling of root cause analysis.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:17

Both Wang et al. [131] and CloudRCA [143] utilize log events to benefit root cause analysis. Since logs are unstructured or semi-unstructured texts about system operation, user activities, and events of hardware interactions, both approaches employ NLP techniques to extract contextual features of log data for data optimization. For example, Wang et al. [131] make use of the state-ofthe-art log anomaly detection algorithm, DeepLog [34], to extract features.
The traditional Bayesian network usually rely on manual domain knowledge and expert experience to manually construct network structures, which cannot prtform effective analyses for complex dependencies. To accommodate this complexity, TraceAnomaly [73] combines the traditional Bayesian network with DL-based models. This approach allows probabilistic analysis of the fault root causes by Bayesian inference, providing uncertainty estimation and interpretability of the model. In addition, it also can leverage the powerful representation learning capabilities of DL to predict complex dependencies. Traditional Bayesian network-based approaches cannot deal with entirely new types of fault root causes that have never been seen before. Therefore, CloudRCA [143] has an innovative design of a hierarchical root cause layer in the basic Bayesian network. The use of AI in conjunction with traditional models has been demonstrated to significantly improve the performance of direct root cause analysis.
To utilize historical data intelligently, the AI-driven method[146], transforms the unsupervised root cause inference into a supervised multi-classification. It chooses three Machine Learning (ML) methods, such as Random Forest (RF), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), to train the model. Compared with the traditional unsupervised root cause analysis studies, supervised classification methods can fully utilize the relations between the known inputs and the corresponding labels to learn, making supervised learning highly accurate in determining the root causes. However, obtaining high-quality labeled data in a large-scale and complex microservice system is significantly tricky, which places high demands on fault injection strategies, data collection, and preprocessing methods.
5 Indirect Analysis for Root Cause Localization
In this section, we divide indirect analysis methods into causal relation-based and topological relation-based root cause localization. Causal relations represent the impact of fault occurrence on other components and fault propagation paths. On the other hand, topological relations represent physical or logical service dependencies, inter-service invocation relations, and logical relations stored in the CMDB. Graphs significantly impact the subsequent root cause analysis. Therefore, we describe commonly used root cause inference algorithms in detail and highlight AI-driven methods.
5.1 Indirect Root Causes Localization Based on Causal Relations
5.1.1 Graphs Representation of Causal Relations. Causal graphs. Causal graphs typically use the Peter-Clark (PC) algorithm and variants [121] for causality discovery. In existing studies, CauseInfer [19, 20], Guan21 [44], FacGraph [69], Qiu et al. [108], AutoMap [80], MicroCause [85], CIRCA [62], MS-rank [77, 78], HRLHF [130], Zhang et al. [142] and CloudRanger [132] all use PC or optimized PC algorithms to construct relations between system components. The PC algorithm finally outputs a directed acyclic graph that characterizes the relations between the impact of microservices or other-level components [48].
However, there are four problems with using the PC algorithm to construct causal graphs. First, the PC algorithm only applies to systematic observation data and can only extract the correlation between two consecutive variables [52]. Second, the PC algorithm needs to perform more conditional independence tests to construct a complete causal graph, which does not apply to large-scale microservice systems. Third, it has been demonstrated [52] that the large-scale

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:18

N. Fu et al.

metrics generated by services lead to a significant resource overhead in applying the PC algorithm directly to microservice systems. Some methods use feature selection techniques to reduce data size [80, 125, 132], but these methods may result in the selection of metrics that do not include the metrics of fault root causes. Finally, The causal structure extracted by the PC algorithm is a directed acyclic graph, which does not apply to real business environments since natural business environments contain cyclic dependencies.
Fault propagation graphs. Fault propagation graphs are commonly used to locate a subset of components affected by faults [103], describing the propagation paths and impact ranges of faults [22]. However, there are differences in graph construction methods and focus perspectives across studies. For example, FRL-MFPG [22] characterizes both the propagation pattern of anomalies through microservice dependencies and the correlation between the presence of microservice components in the same service, node, or location. It does so by aggregating the Link Call Graph of end-to-end Tracking (LCGT) and the Fault Correlation Directed Graph (FCDG), which ultimately enables the construction of the fault propagation graph. Differently, Narayanaa et al. [88] constructs a directed fault graph, where nodes represent fault components and edges are used to characterize whether the occurrence of one fault triggers another fault, and probability weights are introduced into the edges and nodes that lead to faults.
Inference graphs. To simultaneously model the dependencies between fault root causes and observations, load balancers, and fault propagation redundancy relations, Sherlock [11] devises a novel method for constructing inference graphs. The inference graph is a labeled directed graph with nodes containing mainly root cause nodes, observation nodes, and meta-nodes. Flock [47] focuses on the presence of faulty components in the data center network that do not generate fault reports [50], called "gray faults." It uses collected telemetry data, network topology, and routing information to construct a Probabilistic Graphical Model (PGM) to characterize network service interactions. Like Flock [47], Shrink [56] also implements fault root causes analysis by constructing a Bayesian Network model.
5.1.2 Intelligent Root Cause Localization. Based on constructed graphs, existing research uses different inference methods to determine root causes. Most traditional methods are random walk algorithms [5], Breadth-First Search (BFS) or Depth-First Search (DFS) [19, 20, 108], and graph analysis [69]. In particular, AI in root causes inference is gradually gaining prominence [65]. Readers can attain deeper views in this survey [45] to understand causality learning.
Random Walk. Random Walk is a graph search algorithm that achieves fault root causes localization by restricting the search direction to regions that contain more favorable information. In existing root cause localization methods, traditional random walk [21], second-order random walk [79], and optimized random walk [85] methods are commonly used. Specifically, Aggarwal et al. [5], MicroDiag [135], and TON18 [133] use the traditional random walk method, which is a statistical model consisting of a series of trajectories [85], and each step selection is randomized. However, the traditional random walk algorithm follows Markovianity, i.e., the next node to be visited depends only on the current node. This method cannot capture higher-order dependencies, and deep inference for causality is flawed. Therefore, some methods [79, 132] use the second-order random walk algorithm for root cause localization. For example, ServiceRank [79] determines the path for the random walk by considering the correlation of impacts between microservices when a fault occurs. In addition, some studies have updated and designed personalized random walk algorithms based on constructed graphs.
BFS and DFS. Microscope [67], Qiu et al. [108], and CauseInfer [19, 20] view root cause localization as a path search problem. Microscope [67] uses the BFS algorithm to start searching from the anomalous node of the causal graph while searching in the opposite direction. Similar

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:19

to Microscope [67], Qiu et al. [108] also uses a search strategy based on the BFS algorithm, primarily determining the best search path using a queue to store vector-type paths. Unlike Microscope [67] and Qiu et al. [108], CauseInfer [19, 20] primarily uses the DFS algorithm to search for metrics-based causal graphs. It considers an anomalous node the fault root cause in a tree structure composed of anomalous nodes when the anomalous node is a leaf node or the descendants do not contain anomalous nodes.
AI-driven analysis. Some studies have used AI methods to achieve root cause localization. For example, DejaVu [65] introduces a concept to characterize faults comprehensively, i.e., "failure units," to improve the interpretability of root causes. It maps the metrics of all failure units from the same type of faults into fixed-length feature vectors and trains a feature extraction model for each fault type. Subsequently, to model the propagation patterns of faults, DejaVu [65] designs feature aggregation models based on an attention mechanism, which encodes the structural information of a graph into aggregated feature vectors. Ultimately, it determines whether a failure unit is the fault root cause by designing a binary classification model that scores each failure unit. Furthermore, to reduce the search scope and the number of queries, HRLHF [130] uses a Reinforcement Learning (RL) architecture to reduce the number of queries from O n2 to O (1). It first constructs an initial graph of service dependencies and learns the underlying causal discovery strategy through a supervised learning model. Subsequently, it uses the collected human feedback to train a reward model and optimizes the causal discovery strategy by the reward model.
5.2 Indirect Root Causes Localization Based on Topological Relations
Murphy [48] classifies the graph structures used to characterize dependencies between instances into two types: dependency graphs [125, 129, 134, 144] and relationship graphs [48, 57]. Dependency graphs are directed acyclic graphs that characterize known dependencies, in particular, using microservice invocation graphs to characterize dependencies. On the other hand, relationship graphs require modeling potential dependencies based on known dependencies.
5.2.1 Dependency Graphs Representation. Dependency graphs based on service-level dependencies. Most methods based on the dependency graphs usually analyze the service-level dependencies, such as AAMR [144], ModelCoder [16], Wu et al. [134], TRACE DIAG [32], Grace [110], MicroMILTS [137], MicroHECL [70]. For example, AAMR [144] constructs a service dependency graph based on the network connections between microservices and uses a personalized PageRank algorithm [55] to rank the possible fault root causes. However, these methods have some problems. Therefore, some methods have proposed new solution ideas using AI in three aspects: feature characterization, simplification of the graph structure, and modeling of root cause inference.
Some methods use feature encoding methods, like LSTM deep learning models, to transform the graph structures into uniform feature vectors based on service dependency graphs, such as MicroMILTS [137] and ModelCoder [16]. MicroMILTS [137] argues that frequent and complex invocations between microservices generate large-scale performance metrics, which makes it impractical to find metric bottlenecks in large-scale metrics by setting thresholds. ModelCoder [16] proposes a novel method for encoding the features of nodes. It categorizes the features of a node into four types: the features of the target node itself, its parent nodes, child nodes, and bidirectional nodes. Different coding features are formed for different fault types. Finally, ModelCoder determines the fault root cause by automatically matching feature vectors between known and to-be-tested faults. Besides, TRACE DIAG [32] and HRLHF [130] introduce RL to achieve pruning of redundant parts of the service dependency graph. These methods collect large-scale individual trace records and aggregate these trace records based on time sequences.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:20

N. Fu et al.

Based on the constructed service dependency graphs, there exist some methods [18, 41, 110] that use the DL to determine the fault root causes. For example, Grace [110] proposes a supervised classification method that implements a root cause localization with strong interpretability. It can identify the microservice that causes the fault and provide anomaly metrics, the type of fault that occurred, and related dependency information associated with the faulty microservice. Similarly, Chen et al. [18] implement the fault localization of microservices by training a supervised classification model DNN based on trace records. On the other hand, to solve the performance prediction problem in microservice systems, Seer [41] uses CNN and LSTM models to learn QoS conflicts' temporal and spatial features and locate the root-cause microservices that trigger performance degradation.
Dependency graphs based on fine-grained and multi-level dependencies. Several studies [14, 29, 48, 57, 74, 111] further analyze finer-grained, multi-level dependencies. DLA [111] targets Kubernetes-based microservice systems by dividing the system architecture into five layers and analyzing the data dependencies across them. NetMedic [57] classifies components into five categories based on fault types: application processes, hosts, network paths, firewall configurations, and virtual components used to represent the behavior of communicating objects in a process. This method determines the level of root causes analysis based on the level of components being modeled. In addition, Dandona et al. [29] propose a dynamic multi-level dependency graph containing an application and service layer, a virtualized computational layer, a physical computational layer, and a vital support system layer from the top down.
The above methods determine the fault root cause based on the constructed service-level or multi-level dependency graph [113]. We propose that the presence of noisy data during the graph construction process may have a significant impact on the final localization results. However, the localization results of these methods depend heavily on the quality of constructed graphs. When the quality of graphs is low, the effectiveness of these methods is flawed.
5.2.2 Relationship Graphs Representation. Murphy [48] introduces the relationship graph and designs the relationship graph to model potential dependencies. Similarly, NetMedic [57] adopts the concept of relationship graphs based on dependency graphs. However, compared with Murphy, NetMedic uses a fixed heuristic algorithm to implement root cause inference, making it ineffective in an actual network environment. Therefore, Murphy utilizes multi-level monitoring metrics to obtain some descriptions of a set of entities associated with a fault. The above graph construction method characterizes two entities as having potential dependencies in two directions, which differs from traditional dependency graphs. When the dependencies between two entities become known through metrics data, e.g., it is clear that Entity A depends on Entity B, Murphy uses directed edges pointing from Entity A to Entity B instead of directed edges in the original two directions. With this design, Murphy ensures that potential dependencies between entities are analyzed in the most general method possible.
5.2.3 Comparison of Indirect Analysis Methods. Table 8 recaps the surveyed methods based on topological relations from three perspectives: input data, inference techniques, and root cause granularity. It provides the required data level, i.e., whether they contain only applicationor service-level data or whether they also contain other-level data. In addition, we summarize the common techniques to achieve root cause inference. Different inference methods ultimately land on identifying faults at different granularities. Therefore, we classify the localization granularity.
Taking Table 8 as a reference, we hereafter analyze challenges faced by two graph-based indirect root cause analyses. The two graph structures have differences in construction perspective and focus. For adaptability in actual network environments, it has been shown [79] that causal relations-based graphs are more accurate than topological relations-based graphs because the

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:21

Table 8. Classification of Root Causes Localization Based on Topological Relations, Based on Their Class (viz., Y for using AI Techniques, N for not using AI Techniques)

Methods AAMR [144]
Wu et al. [134] MicroRCA [136] ModelCoder [16] MicroMILTS [137] MicroHECL [70] MonitorRank [58] Sieve [125] RCSF [129] TRACE DI AG [32] MicroRank [139] Chen et al. [18] Seer [41] ADGS [75] DLA [111] Dandona et al. [29]
NetMedic [57]
Murphy [48] GraphRCA [14] Grace [110]

Class N
N N N N N N N N Y N Y Y N Y N
N
Y N Y

Input Data
system and application-level metrics
system, application, and network-level metrics system and application-level metrics application and underlying service-level metrics
container-level metrics application-level metrics
time-series metrics application-level metrics and statistics on the operation of system components application-level performance metrics
trace records trace records
trace records
trace records response time and system performance metrics
multi-level performance metrics Full range of performance metrics
across hardware and software multi-level performance metrics, such as application process, host, and configuration
multi-level performance metrics, such as application, host, and VM metrics, logs, and network operations
application and underlying service-level metrics and trace records

Inference Techniques
personalized PageRank
personalized PageRank
personalized PageRank feature matching PageRank BFS
personalized PageRank
KPI correlation analysis
sequence pattern mining [9] graphical causal model [15]
spectrum analysis multiple classification based on supervised DL DL with multiple models graph similarity computation
Markov analysis
inference length method [120]
KPI correlation analysis
markov random field (MRF)
pattern matching binary classification based on supervised DL

Root Cause Granularity microservices and their
anomaly metrics microservices and their
anomaly metrics microservices
microservices and their features microservices
microservices and fault types metrics
system components and corresponding metric categories
system components multi-level system components
microservices
microservices
microservices microservices and physical nodes
metrics
hardware and software components
multi-level system components
Multi-level components, fault types, and dependencies system components
microservices and their metrics, failure types, and dependencies

In the Input Data column: single-level metrics; multi-level metrics; trace records; multi-source heterogeneous

data. In the Root Cause Granularity column: components/components and related information;

microservices/microservices and related information; anomalous metrics.

former focuses more on anomaly correlation in its construction. In addition, all the results of the above two graph-based studies rely to a greater extent on the graphs' accuracy, real-time, and simplicity. HRLHF [130] also points out that due to the complex and hidden dependencies between microservices, there is a more significant challenge in accurately constructing causal graphs in large-scale microservice systems in real-time from observed data [52, 59]. More importantly, HRLHF [130] propose that the adoption of the "human-in-the-loop" training idea in large language models such as ChatGPT [99] proposed has proven to be promising in designing customized models and improving model performance. Therefore, it is promising to design and train a root cause localization model with low dependence on graph structure using a large model.
5.3 AI-Driven Indirect Analysis Methods
We summarize the primary usage and generated effects of AI for root cause localization and divide the role played by AI into two parts: the optimization of graph representation and the modeling of root cause analysis.
The optimization of graph representation focuses on the dependency relation redundancy and high resource consumption in constructing dependency graphs. AI techniques, such as RL, can help reduce resource consumption and enable fast and efficient learning of causal discovery strategies. For example, HRLHF [130], based on the static topology of microservice systems, effectively utilizes feedback from human engineers to reduce uncertainty in the discovery of service dependency graphs. In addition, it uses an RL model to reduce the number of required queries from O N 2 to O (1), constructing the service dependency graphs with high accuracy and low resource consumption. The process is shown in Figure 6. This method first collects the initial graphs of service dependencies and learns the underlying causal discovery strategies through a supervised learning model. Subsequently, HRLHF [130] efficiently collects human feedback and trains a reward model.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:22

N. Fu et al.

Fig. 6. An instance of graph representation optimization using AI.
Fig. 7. An instance of root cause analysis modeling using the graph convolutional network.
Finally, it optimizes the causal discovery strategy through the reward model obtained from the training and obtains more accurate and straightforward service dependency graphs. It provides superior performance in various metrics compared with state-of-the-art methods. Therefore, using AI techniques to process, analyze, and correlate large-scale data generated by microservice systems has substantial advantages.
Root cause analysis modeling refers to using AI techniques for root cause localization. Existing methods are mainly divided into supervised classification models and unsupervised inference models. Unsupervised inference models mostly use the heuristic random walk algorithm to root cause localization, such as MicroRCA [136] and MonitorRank [58]. The algorithms of these learning models are relatively lightweight and do not require pre-prepared labeled data and pre-trained models. Therefore, heuristic unsupervised inference models require lower resource and time consumption and are more adaptable to network environments. However, these learning models lack sufficient learning of historical fault information. In addition, some methods have shown that the distribution of fault root causes satisfies the Eighty-Twenty rule. That is, the root causes of 80% of faults are always of several fixed types. Therefore, some methods use supervised classification models to achieve root cause localization. They aim at using historical fault features fully and analyze historical fault patterns from multimodal data. More importantly, to provide operators with adequate fault-related interpretable information, some studies still extend the granularity of fault localization from microservices or anomalous metrics to fault scenarios. For example, Grace [110] uses a spatial-temporal graph convolutional network to binary classify each microservice and uses the interpreter model to provide interpretable information about faults, as shown in Figure 7.
However, by analyzing the attributes of the publicly available dataset provided by AIOPS2022, we find that all the labeled data required by supervised classification methods need to be
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:23

pre-prepared by engineers. This process relies on specialized knowledge and expends many workforce and material resources. Furthermore, a large amount of data in the above dataset remains unlabeled, and there are variations in the amount of labeled data generated by different faults, which may lead to an imbalance in the training data. More importantly, getting pure and accurate labeled data in a complex microservice system is challenging. All of the above issues significantly impact the quality of the training data, and low-quality labeled data may create uncertainty in the performance of supervised classification methods. Therefore, we propose that subsequent research focuses on the generation and preprocessing of labeled data if it is to be based on supervised classification methods. On the other hand, future works can investigate fault localization methods based on small amounts of labeled data and consider combining semi-supervised or self-supervised learning modes to enhance the performance of classification learning.
Besides, the accuracy and efficiency are contradictory, and existing methods lack a tradeoff of accuracy and efficiency. After the above analysis of the two models, supervised classification models focus more on the accuracy of fault localization and tend to ignore the discussion of efficiency. In contrast, unsupervised heuristic algorithms have a lower accuracy of fault localization than classification models because of insufficient utilization of historical information. However, these methods have high efficiency. Therefore, the subsequent methods need to deeply have a tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency, making the localization method more practical in actual environments.
6 Performance Evaluation and Qualitative Comparison
Taking the analysis of the fault root cause localization in the microservice system in Section 4 and Section 5 as a reference, we hereafter summarize the surveyed techniques for identifying the possible fault root causes under three different perspectives, viz., the root cause analysis methods' attribute comparison (Section 6.1), localization level and granularity comparison (Section 6.2) and the effectiveness and efficiency evaluation (Section 6.3).
6.1 Attribute Comparison of Root Cause Localization
To compare the differences in problem modeling and localization performance between existing methods, this survey classifies the root cause inference methods. Besides, it analyzes the existing methods in five aspects: interpretable, adaptive, scalable, practical, and multi-source, respectively. As shown in Table 9, the methods published in top conferences or journals are from 2018 to the present. The newest methods are located at the top in chronological order. We classify 12 methods into two categories based on whether they use AI, and seven methods use AI techniques to improve localization performance.
Interpretability indicates a method that can interpret the output, provide actionable recommendations to network managers, and assist in the recovery of faults. Most existing fault localization methods, such as Revelio [33], FluxRank [72], and Pham et al. [102], do not have explicit interpretability. Some existing DL-based interpretation methods [12, 31] focus on understanding the internal mechanisms of the model rather than the faults themselves. The seven methods possess interpretability, e.g., Grace [110] provides the fault root causes, fault types, related anomaly metrics, and the dependencies based on the GNNExplainer structure.
Adaptability indicates a method can dynamically adjust and optimize its algorithm based on data characteristics and feedback information. Five methods possess adaptability, more commonly found in heuristic unsupervised learning models. For example, DyCause [100] designs an adaptive threshold algorithm from the environment to realize the construction of service dependency graphs based on dynamic causality curves.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:24

N. Fu et al.

Table 9. Comparison of Features among Different Fault Root Cause Localization Methods, Based on Their Class (viz., Y for using AI Techniques, N for not using AI Techniques)

Methods TRACE DI AG [32] HRLHF [130] Murphy [48] Grace [110] DejaVu [65] ServiceRank [79] DyCause [100] GROOT [128] MS-Rank [77, 78] MEPFL [146] Seer [41] TON18 [133]

Class Y Y Y Y Y N N N N Y Y N

Problem Modeling graphical causal model on service dependency graphs graphical causal model on service dependency graphs
MRF analysis on relationship graphs supervised classification model on service dependency graphs supervised classification model on failure dependency graphs second-order random walk model on
impact graphs anomaly propagation path analysis on
correlation graphs personalized random walk on
event causality graphs heuristic random walk on
impact graphs supervised classification model on
track records probabilistic prediction model on
service dependency graphs random walk on
anomaly propagation graphs

Interpretable1            

Adaptive2            

Scalable3            

Practical4            

Multi-Source5            

1Interpretable: The method has a high interpretation capability for faults, which helps engineers develop a fault

recovery strategy. 2Adaptive: The method has the ability to dynamically adjust algorithms based on data characteristics, feedback, or

context. 3Scalable: The method has excellent performance in different scale environments. 4Practical: The method has been applied in actual production environments. 5Multi-Source: The method has the ability to identify and locate the root cause of multiple faults.
 denotes the presence of a feature and  denotes its absence.

Scalability indicates that a method can perform excellently in different scales of environments, and five methods have scalability. For example, DejaVu [65] discusses scalability by analyzing the time consumption of model training and analyzes the training time for each epoch regarding the number of metrics, failures, or failure instances.
Practicality indicates that a method has been applied in an actual production environment, and seven methods have practicality. For example, TRACE DIAG [32] has been integrated as a critical component in Microsoft Exchange systems. Future research can utilize the big model to design lightweight and high-speed fault localization methods. Ultimately, the localization methods are deployed as plug-ins, achieving mutual enhancement with the big model.
Multi-Source of a method indicates that it can identify and localize multiple root causes of faults, and all seven methods already have this capacity. For example, by constructing a multi-prediction model, MEPFL [146] achieves the classification of fault type and the number of fault root causes. Although it has been shown that the probability of a complex situation with multiple root causes of faults simultaneously is low [27], a certain percentage still exists.
Future methods can interact with microservice systems for multiple single- or multi-root-cause fault types, finally achieving seconds-level fault localization. In addition, due to the extensive use of cloud native techniques in production environments, fault localization research can incorporate AI techniques to achieve fine-grained localization and provide actionable recommendations for fault recovery.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:25

Fig. 8. Distribution of root cause localization levels in existing research.
6.2 Localization Level and Granularity Comparison
Existing fault localization methods have mainly targeted microservice-level faults, e.g., Grace [110], RCD [52], and FacGraph [69]. In addition, in this survey, it is mentioned in Section 3 that the widespread use of cloud native technology, e.g., K8s, leads to the locations and types of faults becoming diverse. Therefore, some methods for traditional architectures are no longer applicable. For these reasons, this survey reclassifies the fault occurrence locations or localization levels.
We classify the localization level of microservice systems based on cloud-native architecture into seven levels, as shown in Figure 8. Higher-level components are vulnerable to lower-level components. That is, the more fine-grained the localization level of a fault, the less impactful that fault will be. In the seven levels, microservice-level faults have received extensive attention. For example, MS-Rank [77, 78] uses an adaptive random walk algorithm to determine the microservices that are the fault root causes in the impact graph. In the rectangular box of Figure 8 are the methods for service-level faults, including FRL-MFPG [22], RCD [52], and MicroCause [85]. Four fault localization methods for cross-level are illustrated in Figure 8. For example, Psqueeze [63] focuses on Pod-level and microservice-level faults.
Cloud-native technologies, such as K8s, have led to increasingly complex relations between upper-tier applications, intermediate components, and infrastructures, creating challenges for cross-level correlation of faults and discovering fault impact propagation paths. Therefore, we propose that subsequent research needs to correlate across-level faults end-to-end. Ultimately, when a fault occurs, the level at which the fault occurs and the cross-level propagation path of the fault can be quickly and efficiently analyzed, which helps analyze the scope of fault impact and provides recovery strategies. In addition, we propose to use the concept of fault scenarios on top of the concepts of fault levels and fault types to provide operators with fault-related interpretable information.
6.3 Effectiveness and Efficiency Evaluation
When applied to actual environments, localization methods face a conflict, i.e., Effectiveness and Efficiency. We first introduce the two types of evaluation metrics. Then, we depict the necessity of time and resource overhead evaluation. Finally, we give the comprehensive performance evaluations of existing top studies in this community.
6.3.1 Ranking and Classification Evaluation Metrics. Evaluation metrics are closely related to research objectives and problems. This survey first summarizes six ranking evaluation metrics that
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:26

N. Fu et al.

have been widely used in this community. The top-k accuracy and average accuracy metrics are widely used to evaluate the ranking results [85]. However, this metric does not consider all recommended fault units in the evaluation process. The average accuracy metric, denoted as Avg@k, describes the overall performance of the accuracy for the fault localization. Besides, when the data is not balanced or extreme data exists, the accuracy-related metrics cannot objectively evaluate the algorithm. MonitorRank [58] proposes the top-k precision and average precision, which have been widely used in subsequent studies. The top-k precision metric, denoted PR@k, describes the percentage of outcomes where the fault root cause is correctly predicted out of all outcomes predicted to be the fault root cause. The average precision, denoted as MAP, describes the overall performance of the fault localization by computing the average of PR@k. The above four evaluation metrics are mainly used to evaluate the performance of single fault root cause localization. Some methods propose an evaluation metric for multiple fault root cause localization. For example, DyCause [100] defines an evaluation method, denoted as RankScore.
Besides, some studies also use the classification evaluation metrics. For binary classification, they mostly use the four common metrics: Accuracy, Precision, Recall (TPR), and FPR. Moreover, some metrics that consider two above metrics comprehensively are proposed. For example, F1 combines Precision and Recall, and ROC combines FPR and Recall.
6.3.2 Time and Resource Overhead. The business delivery has high time requirements for fault root cause localization. Time overhead is an important issue affecting methods' adaptability and practicality. In traditional heuristic root cause localization, time overhead mainly refers to testing time. For methods that require the construction of graphs, the time overhead required for the graph construction needs to be considered. In addition, with the application of ML and DL, the time overhead of these AI-driven methods mainly consists of training and testing time. More attention is given to the testing time required from fault discovery to localization results output in actual environments. Furthermore, root cause localization studies need to be integrated into microservice systems to improve the quality of application delivery. The resource overhead required for data collection and root cause analysis, such as CPU, memory, IO reads and writes, and disk storage, should not significantly burden the original system. Therefore, to improve the approach's scalability, the studies need to be evaluated from the resource overhead.
Table 10 shows the evaluation of 17 top studies. We compare these studies in terms of learning paradigms, application scenarios, effectiveness, and efficiency. Closed-world evaluation means that the methods consider only known types and features and assume that the labels in the evaluation dataset are complete and accurate. At the same time, open-world evaluation means that the methods can deal with unknown fault types and unrecorded or unused attributes. For example, DejaVu [65] has been demonstrated to achieve similar performance on previously unseen faults as seen. Most studies cannot perform highly in the open world. In addition, Existing methods have focused more on improving the localization effectiveness rather than efficiency. Few studies focus on resource overhead, which is important for evaluating the impact of methods on original systems.
7 Challenges and Future Directions
Root cause analysis is essential for maintaining software and infrastructure systems. Its goal is to quickly and accurately identify the causes of faults to minimize downtime and improve availability and reliability. Traditional rule-based methods struggle to meet the demands of modern, complex environments such as cloud and edge computing. Consequently, AI-driven approaches are becoming mainstream, offering greater intelligence, automation, and efficiency.
AI-driven methods not only enhance fault localization by reducing manual effort, time, and errors but also provide repair suggestions, predict potential issues, and support proactive

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:27

Table 10. Effectiveness and Efficiency Evaluation for Root Cause Localization in Microservice Systems, Based on Their Class (viz., Y for using AI Techniques, N for not using AI Techniques)

Learning Paradigm

Methods

Class

Closed World

TraceAnomaly [73] Y



Psqueeze [63]

N



Murphy [48]

Y



ServiceRank [79] N 

Unsupervised DyCause [100] N 

Learning

GROOT [128]

N

MS-Rank [77, 78] N 

TON18 [133]

N

Microscope [67] N 

Reinforcement TRACE DI AG [32] Y



Learning

HRLHF [130]

Y



MEPFL [146]

Y



Supervised Learning

Seer [41]

Y



CloudRCA [143] Y



Grace [110]

Y



DejaVu [65]

Y



 denotes the presence of a evaluation and  denotes its absence.

Open
World                

Effec-
tiveness                

Time
Overhead                

Resource
Overhead                

maintenance. By leveraging historical data, AI-driven RCA identifies system bottlenecks, improves fault tolerance and resilience, and optimizes resource usage by identifying waste and bottlenecks. Moreover, it offers development and operations teams a unified, transparent view of system health, fostering better collaboration and improving overall operational efficiency.
The Microservices systems rely on modern infrastructures for stable operation. Although AIdriven analysis methods show great potential in software and infrastructure maintenance, effective root cause localization in microservice systems still faces challenges in data collection, feature correlation, high-performance model construction, and application scenario expansion. At the same time, these challenges present unprecedented opportunities for innovative research in future work.

7.1 Data Collection and Analysis
Effective root cause localization in microservice systems relies on high-quality, fine-grained observability data. However, existing data collection and analysis approaches face several critical challenges.
First, a mismatch exists between benchmark and production fault data, which limits the applicability of many current techniques. Public benchmark datasets often focus on faults such as CPU or memory exhaustion, packet loss, or latency anomalies. However, these fault types do not fully capture the complexity of real-world failures in production environments, which are often more subtle, multi-layered, or service-composite. In modern cloud-native architectures, fault localization at the microservice or host level is often too coarse-grained to support precise and actionable diagnosis. Real-world failure scenarios frequently require finer-grained system modeling across multiple components and deployment layers to identify the root cause accurately.
Second, current data collection methods lack adaptability and cannot keep pace with frequent changes in microservice systems. Most agent-based solutions operate with static configurations, resulting in redundant data collection and limited responsiveness to system dynamics. Microservice

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:28

N. Fu et al.

systems are inherently dynamic, with continuous updates in service topology, deployment, and workload characteristics. Without adaptation, data collection strategies become outdated, resulting in data drift and reduced diagnostic relevance. Therefore, there is a pressing need for intelligent, self-adaptive data collection mechanisms that can adjust granularity, scope, and frequency based on observed system behavior or anomaly signals. Techniques such as reinforcement learning or feedback-driven control policies may enable more efficient and context-aware collection strategies.
Third, the heterogeneity and fragmentation of observability data across system layers pose challenges for effective analysis. Metrics, traces, and logs are often collected independently, lacking unified formats or semantic consistency. This fragmentation hampers cross-layer correlation and prevents holistic reasoning about system behavior. To address this, standardized data patterns and unified representations are needed to integrate diverse observability signals.
7.2 Feature Correlation
Feature correlation is essential for accurate root cause localization. However, existing approaches still face two challenges.
First, existing studies are limited in their ability to extract valuable features for fault analysis from large-scale data. Since different fault types exhibit distinct behaviors, the relevance and discriminative power of features vary accordingly. However, few studies explicitly analyze the correlation between specific fault types and their associated features. To address this, future work should quantify the contribution of individual features to localization performance across fault categories, enabling the identification of fault-type-specific feature sets for more targeted and interpretable diagnosis. Given the temporal nature of observability data, models such as LSTM and Transformer are promising for capturing contextual dependencies and encoding rich temporalspatial information.
Second, graph-based methods are effective for modeling interactions among microservices, instances, or components, but their scalability remains a significant concern. As the number of services grows, the cost of graph construction and feature extraction increases sharply in computation and memory. In large-scale systems with hundreds or thousands of microservices, graphs often become high-dimensional, densely connected, and dynamically changing, limiting the efficiency and adaptability of existing techniques. To address this, future work should explore lightweight, hierarchical, or dynamic graph representations, as well as hybrid models that combine graph-based and temporal or attention-based features. Adaptive feature selection and graph pruning can further enhance scalability while preserving interpretability.
7.3 High-Performance Model Construction
Model construction is crucial for achieving root cause localization. However, existing approaches face two challenges.
First, most existing methods utilize multi-source observability data­metrics, logs, and traces­to enhance model input. While this integration increases the coverage of system behavior, current research largely ignores the effects among these data sources. That means features from one modality may override or obscure important signals from another, leading to suboptimal or misleading model behavior. Future work should investigate modality-level feature disentanglement and alignment strategies to ensure that the fusion of multiple data sources leads to performance gains rather than feature interference.
Second, many existing studies rely on graph-based workflows to improve performance by modeling interactions in microservices, instances, or components. While effective, these methods often

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:29

incur significant computational and memory overhead. Some approaches further encode graphs into sequences using LSTM models to capture contextual dependencies, which introduce additional costs and lead to information loss. Such multi-stage pipelines limit their applicability in production environments requiring real-time or low-latency diagnosis. Despite the focus on accuracy, the tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency is often overlooked. Future work should explicitly assess whether the performance gains of graph-based models justify their resource demands, particularly in large-scale systems.
7.4 Application Scenario Expansion
Existing studies primarily focus on centralized cloud environments and the microservice systems they host. As cloud computing has evolved, three traditional service models have emerged: Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS). The widespread adoption of cloud-native technologies has introduced variants of the PaaS model­Container as a Service (CaaS) and Function as a Service (FaaS)­which enhance enterprises' self-service capabilities in the cloud. However, these new computing environments also pose significant challenges for root cause analysis and localization.
In the CaaS, PaaS, and FaaS models, the abstraction level of services gradually increases, reducing the operations team's control and visibility over the underlying infrastructures. This problem may make it difficult to obtain valuable data in time to assess the system's status. In particular, the FaaS environment has short-lived and highly dynamic functions, which lead to significant changes in the number and location of service instances. These changes may increase the complexity of managing dependencies between services and complicate the reasoning of fault propagation patterns, presenting challenges for root cause analysis. Future work should adapt to this dynamic environment to capture data and model the complex changes in service dependencies, enabling accurate root cause localization. In addition, CaaS, PaaS, and FaaS typically operate in multi-tenant environments, where shared resources can lead to interdependent faults. Therefore, future work may also need to consider isolation in multi-tenant settings to prevent misattributing one tenant's faults to another.
The rise of other distributed cloud models, such as edge computing, brings microservices closer to end users, improving service responsiveness. However, edge services have limited computing resources and need to collaborate with cloud centers through cloud-edge cooperation technologies for service interaction. Compared with centralized cloud environments, distributed cloud-edge collaboration scenarios present new challenges for root cause analysis and localization. First, the complexity of cloud and edge network topologies and the distributed nature of microservices lead to an increasing and dynamic number of potential faults in infrastructure, instances, or services. Failures can occur in the cloud, at edge nodes, or across various communication paths between them. Future root cause analysis methods need to adapt to this decentralized and dynamic network environment, enabling real-time monitoring and diagnosis of faults across multiple services. Then, significant differences in observable data features exist between cloud services and edge services. Future work should analyze the feature distributions of cloud networks, edge networks, and cross-network segments, considering the complexities of communication between edge and cloud services. It can help accurately distinguish between communication noise caused by network instability and actual fault delays.
Next, edge services also face challenges due to limited network bandwidth and computing resources, making data collection and analysis for root cause localization more difficult. Future work should adopt lightweight methods and utilize AI techniques to extract fault patterns from massive amounts of metrics, traces, and logs, thereby reducing feature redundancy and

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:30

N. Fu et al.

Fig. 9. An end-to-end fault scenario analysis framework in enterprise networks.
enabling low-overhead, practical RCA. Moreover, existing studies primarily focus on faults within infrastructure and microservices. However, real-world applications operate in open network environments and interact continuously with end users. Limiting RCA to isolated microservice systems overlooks issues that occur along the full end-to-end path. When a fault arises, it is crucial to first delimit its origin­whether from the cloud application, the client, or an intermediate Internet Service Provider (ISP). If attributed to the cloud, finer-grained localization can then be applied. Expanding RCA from closed microservice contexts to open Internet scenarios is essential for improving the quality and adaptability of cloud services.
To illustrate this, we present an end-to-end analysis framework with a new perspective using an enterprise network as an example, as shown in Figure 9. This framework extends root cause analysis to open internet scenarios, introducing new requirements for data collection, analysis, and fault localization. It utilizes three different agents for data collection: the user agent, network agent, and cloud agent. These agents can adjust their measurement strategies based on network conditions and available resources. Subsequently, based on the collected data, the framework achieves the tradeoff between the effectiveness and efficiency of root cause localization through feature correlation and encoding.
8 Conclusions
This article surveys significant studies in root cause localization in microservice systems. Before discussing specific studies, we summarize a general workflow that includes data collection, root cause analysis, and performance evaluation.
We highlight data collection methods in benchmark and production systems and provide dataset construction suggestions by comparing data types, levels, and attributes. Furthermore, we propose a classification into direct and indirect root cause analysis methods, depending on whether graphbased modeling is involved, and emphasize the role and limitations of AI for relationship characterization and fault localization in these analysis methods. Finally, we discuss key challenges and future directions to inspire innovative research.
In conclusion, root cause localization is crucial for maintaining cloud-based services. With the growing adoption of microservice architectures and cloud-native technologies, root cause localization remains a vibrant research direction.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:31

References
[1] Cloud Native Computing Foundation. 2020. CNCF Cloud Native Interactive Landscape. CNCF Cloud Native Interactive Landscape. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://landscape.cncf.io/
[2] Cloud Native Computing Foundation. 2022. What is continuous profiling? CNCF. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https: //www.cncf.io/blog/2022/05/31/what-is-continuous-profiling/
[3] Nightingale. 2024. Nightingale. Nightingale. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://n9e.github.io/ [4] Netflix. 2022. GitHub - Netflix/mantis: A platform that makes it easy for developers to build realtime, cost-effective,
operations-focused applications. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/netflix/mantis [5] Pooja Aggarwal, Ajay Gupta, Prateeti Mohapatra, Seema Nagar, Atri Mandal, Qing Wang, and Amit Paradkar. 2020.
Localization of operational faults in cloud applications by mining causal dependencies in logs using golden signals. In International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing. Springer, 137­149. [6] Faraz Ahmed, Jeffrey Erman, Zihui Ge, Alex X Liu, Jia Wang, and He Yan. 2017. Detecting and localizing end-to-end performance degradation for cellular data services based on tcp loss ratio and round trip time. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 25, 6 (2017), 3709­3722. [7] Vijay Arya, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Pooja Aggarwal, Qing Wang, Prateeti Mohapatra, and Seema Nagar. 2021. Evaluation of causal inference techniques for AIOps. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM India Joint International Conference on Data Science & Management of Data (8th ACM IKDD CODS & 26th COMAD). 188­192. [8] Sachin Ashok, Vipul Harsh, Brighten Godfrey, Radhika Mittal, Srinivasan Parthasarathy, and Larisa Shwartz. 2024. TraceWeaver: Distributed request tracing for microservices without application modification. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference. 828­842. [9] Jay Ayres, Jason Flannick, Johannes Gehrke, and Tomi Yiu. 2002. Sequential pattern mining using a bitmap representation. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 429­435. [10] Azamikram. 2022. GitHub - azamikram/rcd: Root Cause Discovery: Root Cause Analysis of Failures in Microservices through Causal Discovery. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/azamikram/rcd [11] Paramvir Bahl, Ranveer Chandra, Albert Greenberg, Srikanth Kandula, David A. Maltz, and Ming Zhang. 2007. Towards highly reliable enterprise network services via inference of multi-level dependencies. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 37, 4 (2007), 13­24. [12] David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. 2017. Network dissection: Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 6541­6549. [13] Netflix Technology Blog. 2020. Building Netflix's Distributed Tracing Infrastructure. Retrieved from https:// netflixtechblog.com/building-netflixs-distributed-tracing-infrastructure-bb856c319304. Accessed Apr. 4, 2025. [14] Álvaro Brandón, Marc Solé, Alberto Huélamo, David Solans, María S Pérez, and Victor Muntés-Mulero. 2020. Graphbased root cause analysis for service-oriented and microservice architectures. Journal of Systems and Software 159 (2020), 110432. [15] Kailash Budhathoki, Dominik Janzing, Patrick Bloebaum, and Hoiyi Ng. 2021. Why did the distribution change?. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 1666­1674. [16] Yang Cai, Biao Han, Jie Li, Na Zhao, and Jinshu Su. 2021. Modelcoder: A fault model based automatic root cause localization framework for microservice systems. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 29th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQOS'21). IEEE, 1­6. [17] Chaos-mesh. 2025. GitHub - chaos-mesh/chaos-mesh: A Chaos Engineering Platform for Kubernetes. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/chaos-mesh/chaos-mesh [18] Hao Chen, Kegang Wei, An Li, Tao Wang, and Wenbo Zhang. 2021. Trace-based intelligent fault diagnosis for microservices with deep learning. In 2021 IEEE 45th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC'21). IEEE, 884­893. [19] Pengfei Chen, Yong Qi, and Di Hou. 2016. CauseInfer: Automated end-to-end performance diagnosis with hierarchical causality graph in cloud environment. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing 12, 2 (2016), 214­230. [20] Pengfei Chen, Yong Qi, Pengfei Zheng, and Di Hou. 2014. Causeinfer: Automatic and distributed performance diagnosis with hierarchical causality graph in large distributed systems. In IEEE INFOCOM 2014-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 1887­1895. [21] YuHua Chen, NingJiang Chen, WenXiu Xu, LinMing Lian, and Huan Tu. 2021. MFRL-CA: Microservice fault root cause location based on correlation analysis. In 2021 8th International Conference on Dependable Systems and Their Applications (DSA'21). IEEE, 90­101. [22] Yuhua Chen, Dongqi Xu, Ningjiang Chen, and Xu Wu. 2023. FRL-MFPG: Propagation-aware fault root cause location for microservice intelligent operation and maintenance. Information and Software Technology 153 (2023), 107083.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:32

N. Fu et al.

[23] Zhuangbin Chen, Yu Kang, Liqun Li, Xu Zhang, Hongyu Zhang, Hui Xu, Yangfan Zhou, Li Yang, Jeffrey Sun, Zhangwei Xu, Yingnong Dang, Feng Gao, Pu Zhao, Bo Qiao, Qingwei Lin, Dongmei Zhang, and Michael R. Lyu. 2020. Towards intelligent incident management: Why we need it and how we make it. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 1487­1497.
[24] Zhuangbin Chen, Jinyang Liu, Yuxin Su, Hongyu Zhang, Xiao Ling, Yongqiang Yang, and Michael R Lyu. 2022. Adaptive performance anomaly detection for online service systems via pattern sketching. In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering. 61­72.
[25] cncf. 2022. tag-observability/whitepaper.md at main · cncf/tag-observability. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/cncf/tag-observability/blob/main/whitepaper.md
[26] Colin Ian King. 2023. stress-ng (stress next generation). GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/ ColinIanKing/stress-ng
[27] Wikipedia Contributors. 2019. Occam's razor. Wikipedia. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Occam%27s_razor
[28] Coralogix. 2024. Observability: Principles, Challenges, Capabilities & Practices--Coralogix. Retrieved from https: //coralogix.com/guides/observability/. Accessed Apr. 4, 2025.
[29] Divyaansh Dandona, Mevlut Demir, and John J Prevost. 2020. Graph based root cause analysis in cloud data center. In 2020 IEEE 15th International Conference of System of Systems Engineering (SoSE'20). IEEE, 549­554.
[30] Yingnong Dang, Qingwei Lin, and Peng Huang. 2019. Aiops: Real-world challenges and research innovations. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE-Companion'19). IEEE, 4­5.
[31] Vincenzo Di Cicco, Donatella Firmani, Nick Koudas, Paolo Merialdo, and Divesh Srivastava. 2019. Interpreting deep learning models for entity resolution: An experience report using LIME. In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Exploiting Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Data Management. 1­4.
[32] Ruomeng Ding, Chaoyun Zhang, Lu Wang, Yong Xu, Minghua Ma, Xiaomin Wu, Meng Zhang, Qingjun Chen, Xin Gao, Xuedong Gao, Hao Fan, Saravan Rajmohan, Qingwei Lin, and Dongmei Zhang. 2023. TraceDiag: Adaptive, interpretable, and efficient root cause analysis on large-scale microservice systems. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 1762­ 1773.
[33] Pradeep Dogga, Karthik Narasimhan, Anirudh Sivaraman, Shiv Saini, George Varghese, and Ravi Netravali. 2022. Revelio: Ml-generated debugging queries for finding root causes in distributed systems. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 4 (2022), 601­622.
[34] Min Du, Feifei Li, Guineng Zheng, and Vivek Srikumar. 2017. Deeplog: Anomaly detection and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 1285­1298.
[35] eBPF. 2025. eBPF - Introduction, Tutorials & Community Resources. ebpf.io. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://ebpf. io
[36] Elasticsearch B.V. 2025. Logstash: Collect, Parse, Transform Logs. Elastic. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://www. elastic.co/logstash
[37] The Apache Software Foundation. 2025. Apache SkyWalking. skywalking.apache.org. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://skywalking.apache.org/
[38] FudanSELab. 2019. GitHub - FudanSELab/Research-ESEC-FSE2019-AIOPS. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https: //github.com/FudanSELab/Research-ESEC-FSE2019-AIOPS
[39] FudanSELab. 2022. GitHub - FudanSELab/train-ticket: Train Ticket - A Benchmark Microservice System. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/FudanSELab/train-ticket
[40] Yu Gan, Yanqi Zhang, Dailun Cheng, Ankitha Shetty, Priyal Rathi, Nayan Katarki, Ariana Bruno, Justin Hu, Brian Ritchken, Brendon Jackson, Kelvin Hu, Meghna Pancholi, Yuan He, Brett Clancy, Chris Colen, Fukang Wen, Catherine Leung, Siyuan Wang, Leon Zaruvinsky, Mateo Espinosa, Rick Lin, Zhongling Liu, Jake Padilla, and Christina Delimitrou. 2019. An open-source benchmark suite for microservices and their hardware-software implications for cloud & edge systems. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems. 3­18.
[41] Yu Gan, Yanqi Zhang, Kelvin Hu, Dailun Cheng, Yuan He, Meghna Pancholi, and Christina Delimitrou. 2019. Seer: Leveraging big data to navigate the complexity of performance debugging in cloud microservices. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems. 19­33.
[42] Google. 2024. cadvisor. GitHub, Retrieved from https://github.com/google/cadvisor. Accessed Apr. 16, 2024. [43] Jiazhen Gu, Chuan Luo, Si Qin, Bo Qiao, Qingwei Lin, Hongyu Zhang, Ze Li, Yingnong Dang, Shaowei Cai,
Wei Wu, Yangfan Zhou, Murali Chintalapati, and Dongmei Zhang. 2020. Efficient incident identification from

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:33

multi-dimensional issue reports via meta-heuristic search. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 292­303. [44] Zijie Guan, Jinjin Lin, and Pengfei Chen. 2019. On anomaly detection and root cause analysis of microservice systems. In Service-Oriented Computing­ICSOC 2018 Workshops: ADMS, ASOCA, ISYyCC, CloTS, DDBS, and NLS4IoT, Hangzhou, China, November 12­15, 2018, Revised Selected Papers 16. Springer, 465­469. [45] Ruocheng Guo, Lu Cheng, Jundong Li, P Richard Hahn, and Huan Liu. 2020. A survey of learning causality with data: Problems and methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 53, 4 (2020), 1­37. [46] Xiaofeng Guo, Xin Peng, Hanzhang Wang, Wanxue Li, Huai Jiang, Dan Ding, Tao Xie, and Liangfei Su. 2020. Graphbased trace analysis for microservice architecture understanding and problem diagnosis. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 1387­1397. [47] Vipul Harsh, Tong Meng, Kapil Agrawal, and Philip Brighten Godfrey. 2023. Flock: Accurate network fault localization at scale. Proceedings of the ACM on Networking 1, CoNEXT1 (2023), 1­22. [48] Vipul Harsh, Wenxuan Zhou, Sachin Ashok, Radhika Niranjan Mysore, Brighten Godfrey, and Sujata Banerjee. 2023. Murphy: Performance diagnosis of distributed cloud applications. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference. 438­451. [49] Dotan Horovits. 2022. Continuous Profiling: A New Observability Signal. Retrieved from https://logz.io/blog/ continuous-profiling-new-observability-signal-in-opentelemetry/. Accessed Apr. 4, 2025. [50] Peng Huang, Chuanxiong Guo, Lidong Zhou, Jacob R Lorch, Yingnong Dang, Murali Chintalapati, and Randolph Yao. 2017. Gray failure: The achilles' heel of cloud-scale systems. In Proceedings of the 16th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems. 150­155. [51] Bert Hubert. 2023. tc(8) - Linux Man Page. die.net, Retrieved from https://linux.die.net/man/8/tc. Accessed Apr. 15, 2024. [52] Azam Ikram, Sarthak Chakraborty, Subrata Mitra, Shiv Saini, Saurabh Bagchi, and Murat Kocaoglu. 2022. Root cause analysis of failures in microservices through causal discovery. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 31158­31170. [53] The Istio Authors. 2025. Istio. Istio. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://istio.io/ [54] The Jaeger Authors. 2025. Jaeger: open source, distributed tracing platform. www.jaegertracing.io. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://www.jaegertracing.io [55] Glen Jeh and Jennifer Widom. 2003. Scaling personalized web search. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on World Wide Web. 271­279. [56] Srikanth Kandula, Dina Katabi, and Jean-Philippe Vasseur. 2005. Shrink: A tool for failure diagnosis in IP networks. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Mining Network Data. 173­178. [57] Srikanth Kandula, Ratul Mahajan, Patrick Verkaik, Sharad Agarwal, Jitendra Padhye, and Paramvir Bahl. 2009. Detailed diagnosis in enterprise networks. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2009 Conference on Data Communication. 243­254. [58] Myunghwan Kim, Roshan Sumbaly, and Sam Shah. 2013. Root cause detection in a service-oriented architecture. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review 41, 1 (2013), 93­104. [59] Murat Kocaoglu, Amin Jaber, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and Elias Bareinboim. 2019. Characterization and learning of causal graphs with latent variables from soft interventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019). [60] Grafana Labs. 2019. Grafana - The open platform for analytics and monitoring. Grafana Labs. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://grafana.com/ [61] Bowen Li, Xin Peng, Qilin Xiang, Hanzhang Wang, Tao Xie, Jun Sun, and Xuanzhe Liu. 2022. Enjoy your observability: An industrial survey of microservice tracing and analysis. Empirical Software Engineering 27 (2022), 1­28. [62] Mingjie Li, Zeyan Li, Kanglin Yin, Xiaohui Nie, Wenchi Zhang, Kaixin Sui, and Dan Pei. 2022. Causal inference-based root cause analysis for online service systems with intervention recognition. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 3230­3240. [63] Zeyan Li, Junjie Chen, Yihao Chen, Chengyang Luo, Yiwei Zhao, Yongqian Sun, Kaixin Sui, Xiping Wang, Dapeng Liu, Xing Jin, Qi Wang, and Dan Pei. 2023. Generic and robust root cause localization for multi-dimensional data in online service systems. Journal of Systems and Software 203 (2023), 111748. [64] Zeyan Li, Junjie Chen, Rui Jiao, Nengwen Zhao, Zhijun Wang, Shuwei Zhang, Yanjun Wu, Long Jiang, Leiqin Yan, Zikai Wang, Zhekang Chen, Wenchi Zhang, Xiaohui Nie, Kaixin Sui, and Dan Pei. 2021. Practical root cause localization for microservice systems via trace analysis. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 29th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQOS'21). IEEE, 1­10. [65] Zeyan Li, Nengwen Zhao, Mingjie Li, Xianglin Lu, Lixin Wang, Dongdong Chang, Xiaohui Nie, Li Cao, Wenchi Zhang, Kaixin Sui, Yanhua Wang, Xu Du, Guoqiang Duan, and Dan Pei. 2022. Actionable and interpretable fault

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:34

N. Fu et al.

localization for recurring failures in online service systems. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 996­1008. [66] Fred Lin, Keyur Muzumdar, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Mihai-Valentin Curelea, Seunghak Lee, and Sriram Sankar. 2020. Fast dimensional analysis for root cause investigation in a large-scale service environment. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems 4, 2 (2020), 1­23. [67] JinJin Lin, Pengfei Chen, and Zibin Zheng. 2018. Microscope: Pinpoint performance issues with causal graphs in micro-service environments. In Service-Oriented Computing: 16th International Conference, ICSOC 2018, Hangzhou, China, November 12­15, 2018, Proceedings 16. Springer, 3­20. [68] Qingwei Lin, Hongyu Zhang, Jian-Guang Lou, Yu Zhang, and Xuewei Chen. 2016. Log clustering based problem identification for online service systems. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering Companion. 102­111. [69] Weilan Lin, Meng Ma, Disheng Pan, and Ping Wang. 2018. Facgraph: Frequent anomaly correlation graph mining for root cause diagnose in micro-service architecture. In 2018 IEEE 37th International Performance Computing and Communications Conference (IPCCC'18). IEEE, 1­8. [70] Dewei Liu, Chuan He, Xin Peng, Fan Lin, Chenxi Zhang, Shengfang Gong, Ziang Li, Jiayu Ou, and Zheshun Wu. 2021. Microhecl: High-efficient root cause localization in large-scale microservice systems. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP'21). IEEE, 338­347. [71] Dapeng Liu, Youjian Zhao, Haowen Xu, Yongqian Sun, Dan Pei, Jiao Luo, Xiaowei Jing, and Mei Feng. 2015. Opprentice: Towards practical and automatic anomaly detection through machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2015 Internet Measurement Conference. 211­224. [72] Ping Liu, Yu Chen, Xiaohui Nie, Jing Zhu, Shenglin Zhang, Kaixin Sui, Ming Zhang, and Dan Pei. 2019. Fluxrank: A widely-deployable framework to automatically localizing root cause machines for software service failure mitigation. In 2019 IEEE 30th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE'19). IEEE, 35­46. [73] Ping Liu, Haowen Xu, Qianyu Ouyang, Rui Jiao, Zhekang Chen, Shenglin Zhang, Jiahai Yang, Linlin Mo, Jice Zeng, Wenman Xue, and Dan Pei. 2020. Unsupervised detection of microservice trace anomalies through service-level deep bayesian networks. In 2020 IEEE 31st International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE'20). IEEE, 48­58. [74] Zhicheng Liu, Bongshin Lee, Srikanth Kandula, and Ratul Mahajan. 2010. Netclinic: Interactive visualization to enhance automated fault diagnosis in enterprise networks. In 2010 IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology. IEEE, 131­138. [75] Chengzhi Lu, Kejiang Ye, Wenyan Chen, and Cheng-Zhong Xu. 2019. ADGS: Anomaly detection and localization based on graph similarity in container-based clouds. In 2019 IEEE 25th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems (ICPADS'19). IEEE, 53­60. [76] Shutian Luo, Huanle Xu, Chengzhi Lu, Kejiang Ye, Guoyao Xu, Liping Zhang, Yu Ding, Jian He, and Chengzhong Xu. 2021. Characterizing microservice dependency and performance: Alibaba trace analysis. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing. 412­426. [77] Meng Ma, Weilan Lin, Disheng Pan, and Ping Wang. 2019. Ms-rank: Multi-metric and self-adaptive root cause diagnosis for microservice applications. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS'19). IEEE, 60­67. [78] Meng Ma, Weilan Lin, Disheng Pan, and Ping Wang. 2020. Self-adaptive root cause diagnosis for large-scale microservice architecture. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing 15, 3 (2020), 1399­1410. [79] Meng Ma, Weilan Lin, Disheng Pan, and Ping Wang. 2021. Servicerank: Root cause identification of anomaly in largescale microservice architectures. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 19, 5 (2021), 3087­3100. [80] Meng Ma, Jingmin Xu, Yuan Wang, Pengfei Chen, Zonghua Zhang, and Ping Wang. 2020. Automap: Diagnose your microservice-based web applications automatically. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2020. 246­258. [81] Charity Majors, Liz Fong-Jones, and George Miranda. 2022. Observability Engineering. "O'Reilly Media, Inc.". [82] Leonardo Mariani, Cristina Monni, Mauro Pezzé, Oliviero Riganelli, and Rui Xin. 2018. Localizing faults in cloud systems. In 2018 IEEE 11th International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST'18). IEEE, 262­273. [83] Leonardo Mariani, Mauro Pezzč, Oliviero Riganelli, and Rui Xin. 2020. Predicting failures in multi-tier distributed systems. Journal of Systems and Software 161 (2020), 110464. [84] Dhanya R. Mathews, Mudit Verma, J. Lakshmi, and Pooja Aggarwal. 2022. Towards more effective and explainable fault management using cross-layer service topology. In 2022 IEEE 15th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD'22). IEEE, 94­96. [85] Yuan Meng, Shenglin Zhang, Yongqian Sun, Ruru Zhang, Zhilong Hu, Yiyin Zhang, Chenyang Jia, Zhaogang Wang, and Dan Pei. 2020. Localizing failure root causes in a microservice through causality inference. In 2020 IEEE/ACM 28th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS'20). IEEE, 1­10.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:35

[86] Haibo Mi, Huaimin Wang, Yangfan Zhou, Michael Rung-Tsong Lyu, and Hua Cai. 2013. Toward fine-grained, unsupervised, scalable performance diagnosis for production cloud computing systems. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 24, 6 (2013), 1245­1255.
[87] Microservices Demo Authors. 2021. microservices-demo/microservices-demo. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/microservices-demo/microservices-demo
[88] S. R. Narayanaa, R. S. Lekshmi, and M. Sivaranjan. 2022. Fault localization in cloud using centrality measures. In 2022 IEEE 29th Annual Software Technology Conference (STC'22). IEEE, 181­189.
[89] Netflix. 2024. GitHub - Netflix/atlas: In-memory dimensional time series database. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/Netflix/atlas
[90] Netflix. 2025. GitHub - Netflix/spectator: Client library for collecting metrics. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/Netflix/spectator
[91] Spring Cloud Netflix. 2025. 10. Metrics: Spectator, Servo, and Atlas. Spring.io. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https: //cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-netflix/multi/multi_netflix-metrics.html
[92] NetManAIOps. 2022. GitHub - NetManAIOps/DejaVu: Code and datasets for FSE.22 paper "Actionable and Interpretable Fault Localization for Recurring Failures in Online Service Systems." GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/NetManAIOps/DejaVu
[93] NetManAIOps. 2022. GitHub - NetManAIOps/PSqueeze. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/ NetManAIOps/PSqueeze
[94] NetManAIOps. 2021. GitHub - NetManAIOps/TraceRCA: Practical Root Cause Localization for Microservice Systems via Trace Analysis. IWQoS 2021. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/NetManAIOps/TraceRCA
[95] Hiep Nguyen, Zhiming Shen, Yongmin Tan, and Xiaohui Gu. 2013. Fchain: Toward black-box online fault localization for cloud systems. In 2013 IEEE 33rd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems. IEEE, 21­30.
[96] Hiep Nguyen, Yongmin Tan, and Xiaohui Gu. 2011. Pal: P ropagation-aware a nomaly l ocalization for cloud hosted distributed applications. In Managing Large-Scale Systems via the Analysis of System Logs and the Application of Machine Learning Techniques. 1­8.
[97] Paolo Notaro, Jorge Cardoso, and Michael Gerndt. 2021. A survey of aiops methods for failure management. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 12, 6 (2021), 1­45.
[98] OpenTelemetry Authors. 2025. What is OpenTelemetry? OpenTelemetry. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https:// opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/
[99] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 27730­27744.
[100] Yicheng Pan, Meng Ma, Xinrui Jiang, and Ping Wang. 2021. Faster, deeper, easier: Crowdsourcing diagnosis of microservice kernel failure from user space. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 646­657.
[101] Hanchuan Peng, Fuhui Long, and Chris Ding. 2005. Feature selection based on mutual information criteria of maxdependency, max-relevance, and min-redundancy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 27, 8 (2005), 1226­1238.
[102] Cuong Pham, Long Wang, Byung Chul Tak, Salman Baset, Chunqiang Tang, Zbigniew Kalbarczyk, and Ravishankar K Iyer. 2016. Failure diagnosis for distributed systems using targeted fault injection. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 28, 2 (2016), 503­516.
[103] Soma Prathiba, S. Sowvarnica, B. Latha, and G. Sumathi. 2018. A comparative study of task and fault tolerance clustering techniques for scientific workflow applications in cloud platform. In Data Science Analytics and Applications: First International Conference, DaSAA 2017, Chennai, India, January 4­6, 2017, Revised Selected Papers 1. Springer, 1­7.
[104] Fluentd Project. 2025. What is Fluentd? | Fluentd. www.fluentd.org. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://www.fluentd. org/architecture
[105] The Prometheus Authors. 2021. prometheus/node_exporter. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/ prometheus/node_exporte
[106] The Prometheus Authors. 2025. Prometheus - Monitoring system & time series database. prometheus.io. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://prometheus.io
[107] Pyroscope. 2022. Open Source Continuous Profiling Platform. Pyroscope.io. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https:// pyroscope.io/
[108] Juan Qiu, Qingfeng Du, Kanglin Yin, Shuang-Li Zhang, and Chongshu Qian. 2020. A causality mining and knowledge graph based method of root cause diagnosis for performance anomaly in cloud applications. Applied Sciences 10, 6 (2020), 2166.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

325:36

N. Fu et al.

[109] Gang Ren, Eric Tune, Tipp Moseley, Yixin Shi, Silvius Rus, and Robert Hundt. 2010. Google-wide profiling: A continuous profiling infrastructure for data centers. IEEE Micro 30, 4 (2010), 65­79.
[110] Rui Ren, Yang Wang, Fengrui Liu, Zhenyu Li, Gareth Tyson, Tianhao Miao, and Gaogang Xie. 2023. Grace: Interpretable root cause analysis by graph convolutional network for microservices. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 31st International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS'23). IEEE, 1­4.
[111] Areeg Samir and Claus Pahl. 2019. Dla: Detecting and localizing anomalies in containerized microservice architectures using markov models. In 2019 7th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud'19). IEEE, 205­213.
[112] Samuel. 2020. The 3 Pillars of System Observability: Logs, Metrics, and Tracing. Retrieved from https://iamondemand. com/blog/the-3-pillars-of-system-observability-logs-metrics-and-tracing/. Accessed Apr. 4, 2025.
[113] Huasong Shan, Yuan Chen, Haifeng Liu, Yunpeng Zhang, Xiao Xiao, Xiaofeng He, Min Li, and Wei Ding. 2019. ?-diagnosis: Unsupervised and real-time diagnosis of small-window long-tail latency in large-scale microservice platforms. In The World Wide Web Conference. 3215­3222.
[114] Junxian Shen, Han Zhang, Yang Xiang, Xingang Shi, Xinrui Li, Yunxi Shen, Zijian Zhang, Yongxiang Wu, Xia Yin, Jilong Wang, Mingwei Xu, Yahui Li, Jiping Yin, Jianchang Song, Zhuofeng Li, and Runjie Nie. 2023. Network-centric distributed tracing with DeepFlow: Troubleshooting your microservices in zero code. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference. 420­437.
[115] Benjamin H. Sigelman, Luiz André Barroso, Mike Burrows, Pat Stephenson, Manoj Plakal, Donald Beaver, Saul Jaspan, and Chandan Shanbhag. 2010. Dapper, a large-scale distributed systems tracing infrastructure. (2010).
[116] SolarWinds Worldwide, LLC. 2025. What is Observability?--IT Glossary | SolarWinds. www.solarwinds.com. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://www.solarwinds.com/resources/it-glossary/observability
[117] SolarWinds Worldwide, LLC. 2025. Log Monitoring | Loggly. Log Analysis | Log Monitoring by Loggly. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://www.loggly.com/product/log-monitoring/
[118] Jacopo Soldani and Antonio Brogi. 2022. Anomaly detection and failure root cause analysis in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 55, 3 (2022), 1­39.
[119] Jacopo Soldani, Damian Andrew Tamburri, and Willem-Jan Van Den Heuvel. 2018. The pains and gains of microservices: A systematic grey literature review. Journal of Systems and Software 146 (2018), 215­232.
[120] Marc Solé, Victor Muntés-Mulero, Annie Ibrahim Rana, and Giovani Estrada. 2017. Survey on models and techniques for root-cause analysis. arXiv:1701.08546. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.08546
[121] Peter Spirtes, Clark N. Glymour, and Richard Scheines. 2000. Causation, Prediction, and Search. MIT Press. [122] Splunk LLC. 2025. Splunk Products. Splunk. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://www.splunk.com/en_us/products.
html [123] The strace developers. 2024. strace/strace. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://github.com/strace/strace [124] Netflix. 2022. Cassandra. Netflix TechBlog. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://netflixtechblog.com/tagged/cassandra [125] Jörg Thalheim, Antonio Rodrigues, Istemi Ekin Akkus, Pramod Bhatotia, Ruichuan Chen, Bimal Viswanath, Lei Jiao,
and Christof Fetzer. 2017. Sieve: Actionable insights from monitored metrics in distributed systems. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM/IFIP/USENIX Middleware Conference. 14­27. [126] A. Thurai and S. D. Linthicum. 2021. GigaOm radar for cloud observability. GigaOm, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, Tech. Rep (2021), 37. [127] Muhammad Usman, Simone Ferlin, Anna Brunstrom, and Javid Taheri. 2022. A survey on observability of distributed edge & container-based microservices. IEEE Access 10 (2022), 86904­86919. [128] Hanzhang Wang, Zhengkai Wu, Huai Jiang, Yichao Huang, Jiamu Wang, Selcuk Kopru, and Tao Xie. 2021. Groot: An event-graph-based approach for root cause analysis in industrial settings. In 2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE'21). IEEE, 419­429. [129] Kui Wang, Carol Fung, Chao Ding, Polo Pei, Shaohan Huang, Zhongzhi Luan, and Depei Qian. 2015. A methodology for root-cause analysis in component based systems. In 2015 IEEE 23rd International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS'15). IEEE, 243­248. [130] Lu Wang, Chaoyun Zhang, Ruomeng Ding, Yong Xu, Qihang Chen, Wentao Zou, Qingjun Chen, Meng Zhang, Xuedong Gao, Hao Fan, Saravan Rajmohan, Qingwei Lin, and Dongmei Zhang. 2023. Root cause analysis for microservice systems via hierarchical reinforcement learning from human feedback. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 5116­5125. [131] Lingzhi Wang, Nengwen Zhao, Junjie Chen, Pinnong Li, Wenchi Zhang, and Kaixin Sui. 2020. Root-cause metric location for microservice systems via log anomaly detection. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS'20). IEEE, 142­150. [132] Ping Wang, Jingmin Xu, Meng Ma, Weilan Lin, Disheng Pan, Yuan Wang, and Pengfei Chen. 2018. Cloudranger: Root cause identification for cloud native systems. In 2018 18th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGRID'18). IEEE, 492­502.

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems

325:37

[133] Jianping Weng, Jessie Hui Wang, Jiahai Yang, and Yang Yang. 2018. Root cause analysis of anomalies of multitier services in public clouds. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 26, 4 (2018), 1646­1659.
[134] Li Wu, Jasmin Bogatinovski, Sasho Nedelkoski, Johan Tordsson, and Odej Kao. 2020. Performance diagnosis in cloud microservices using deep learning. In International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing. Springer, 85­96.
[135] Li Wu, Johan Tordsson, Jasmin Bogatinovski, Erik Elmroth, and Odej Kao. 2021. Microdiag: Fine-grained performance diagnosis for microservice systems. In 2021 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Cloud Intelligence (CloudIntelligence'21). IEEE, 31­36.
[136] Li Wu, Johan Tordsson, Erik Elmroth, and Odej Kao. 2020. Microrca: Root cause localization of performance issues in microservices. In NOMS 2020-2020 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium. IEEE, 1­9.
[137] Linwei Yang, Jing Li, Kuanzhi Shi, Songlin Yang, Qingfu Yang, and Jiangang Sun. 2022. MicroMILTS: Fault location for microservices based mutual information and LSTM autoencoder. In 2022 23rd Asia-Pacific Network Operations and Management Symposium (APNOMS'22). IEEE, 1­6.
[138] Zihao Ye, Pengfei Chen, and Guangba Yu. 2021. T-rank: A lightweight spectrum based fault localization approach for microservice systems. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 21st International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGrid'21). IEEE, 416­425.
[139] Guangba Yu, Pengfei Chen, Hongyang Chen, Zijie Guan, Zicheng Huang, Linxiao Jing, Tianjun Weng, Xinmeng Sun, and Xiaoyun Li. 2021. Microrank: End-to-end latency issue localization with extended spectrum analysis in microservice environments. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021. 3087­3098.
[140] Zabbix LLC. 2018. Zabbix - The Enterprise-Class Open Source Network Monitoring Solution. Zabbix.com. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https://www.zabbix.com
[141] He Zhang, Shanshan Li, Zijia Jia, Chenxing Zhong, and Cheng Zhang. 2019. Microservice architecture in reality: An industrial inquiry. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA'19). IEEE, 51­60.
[142] Qixun Zhang, Tong Jia, Zhonghai Wu, Qingxin Wu, Lichun Jia, Donglei Li, Yuqing Tao, and Yutong Xiao. 2022. Fault localization for microservice applications with system logs and monitoring metrics. In 2022 7th International Conference on Cloud Computing and Big Data Analytics (ICCCBDA'22). IEEE, 149­154.
[143] Yingying Zhang, Zhengxiong Guan, Huajie Qian, Leili Xu, Hengbo Liu, Qingsong Wen, Liang Sun, Junwei Jiang, Lunting Fan, and Min Ke. 2021. CloudRCA: A root cause analysis framework for cloud computing platforms. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 4373­4382.
[144] Zekun Zhang, Bing Li, Jian Wang, and Yongqiang Liu. 2021. AAMR: Automated anomalous microservice ranking in cloud-native environment. In SEKE. 86­91.
[145] Xiang Zhou, Xin Peng, Tao Xie, Jun Sun, Chao Ji, Wenhai Li, and Dan Ding. 2018. Fault analysis and debugging of microservice systems: Industrial survey, benchmark system, and empirical study. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 47, 2 (2018), 243­260.
[146] Xiang Zhou, Xin Peng, Tao Xie, Jun Sun, Chao Ji, Dewei Liu, Qilin Xiang, and Chuan He. 2019. Latent error prediction and fault localization for microservice applications by learning from system trace logs. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 683­694.
[147] The Zipkin Authors. 2025. OpenZipkin · A distributed tracing system. Zipkin.io. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from https: //zipkin.io
Received 29 April 2024; revised 10 April 2025; accepted 29 April 2025

ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.

